I AM AMERICA 

(AND SO CAN YOU!) 
I N T R O D U C T I O N  

I AM NO FAN OF BOOKS. AND CHANCES 

ARE, IF YOU’RE READING THIS, YOU 

AND I SHARE A HEALTHY SKEPTICISM 

ABOUT THE PRINTED WORD. WELL, 

I  WANT  YOU  TO  KNOW  THAT  THIS  IS  THE  FIRST  BOOK 

How many American 
Flags can you find in 
this paragraph? 

I’VE  EVER  WRITTEN,  AND  I  HOPE  IT’S  THE  FIRST  BOOK 

YOU’VE  EVER  READ.  DON’T  MAKE  A  HABIT  OF  IT. 

Now, you might ask yourself, if by yourself you mean me, “Stephen, if you don’t 

like books, why did you write one?” You just asked yourself a trick question. I 

didn’t write it. I dictated it. I shouted it into a tape recorder over the Columbus 

Day weekend, then handed it to my agent and said, “Sell this.” He’s the one 

who turned it into a book. It’s his funeral. 

But I get your “drift.” Why even dictate? 

Well, like a lot of other dictators, there is one man’s opinion I value above all 

others. Mine. And folks, I have a lot of opinions. I’m like Lucy trying to keep 

up with the candy at the chocolate factory. I can barely put them in my mouth 

fast enough. 

In fact, I have so many opinions, I have overwhelmed my ability to document 

myself. I thought my nightly broadcast, The Colbert Report (check your local 

Sorry margin-huggers, 
but I’ve got some 
opinions over here, too. 
Deal with it.1 

listings),  would  pick  up  some  of  the  slack.  But  here’s  the  dirty  little  secret. 

When  the  cameras  go  off,  I’m  still  talking.  And  right  now  all  that  opinion  is 

going to waste, like seed on barren ground. Well no more. It’s time to impreg-

nate this country with my mind. 

1 Yep, down here too. 

ix 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

You will need your confirma-
tion number to log in 

See,  at  one  time  America  was  pure.  Men  were  men,  women  were  women, 

and gays were “confirmed bachelors.” But somewhere around the late 60’s, it 

became “groovy” to “let it all hang out” while you “kept on truckin’” stopping 

only to “give a hoot.” And today, Lady Liberty is under attack from the cable 

channels,  the  internet  blogs,  and  the  Hollywood  celebritocracy,  out  there 

spewing  “facts”  like  so  many  locusts  descending  on  America’s  crop  of  ripe, 

tender values. And as any farmer or biblical scholar will tell you, locusts are 

damn hard to get rid of.2 

I  said  on  the  very  first  episode  of  The  Colbert  Report  that,  together,  I  was 

going to change the world, and I’ve kept up my end of the bargain. But it’s not 

changing fast enough. Last time I checked my supermarket still sold yogurt. 

Half an hour not 
enough 

From  France!  See  a  pattern?  Turns  out,  it  takes  more  than  thirty  minutes  a 

night to fix everything that’s destroying America, and that’s where this book 

comes  in.  It’s  not  just  some  collection  of  reasoned  arguments  supported  by 

facts. That’s the coward’s way out. 

This book is Truth. My Truth. 

I deliver my Truth hot and hard. Fast and Furious. So either accept it without 

hesitation or get out of the way, because somebody might get hurt, and it’s not 

It’s going to be you 

going to be me. 

Think you can handle it? 

I’m scared of Koreans. 

Bam! That’s me off the cuff. Blunt and in your face. No editing. I think it. I say 

it. You read it. Sometimes I don’t even think it, I just say it. 

Baby carrots are trying to turn me gay. 

See? I’m not pulling any punches. I’m telling it like it is. Get used to it or put 

Don’t put this book down 

this book down. Because this book is for America’s Heroes. And who are the 

Heroes? The people who bought this book. That bears repeating. People who 

borrow  this  book  are  not  Heroes.  They  are  no  better  then  welfare  queens 

mooching  off  the  system  like  card-carrying  library  card-carriers.  For  the 

Rides cost money 

record, we’re not offering this book to libraries. No free rides. 

x 

2 I’m going to take a second here to praise the work of Monsanto. Good people. Doing a fine job 
protecting our nation’s food supplies with their insect-resistant Frankenstein corn. They don’t coddle 
pests and I respect that. 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  

Okay, now it’s my turn to ask a question: What do I want from you? 

Good question. 

Thank you 

Just because I haven’t put a lot of thought into this book doesn’t mean you 

shouldn’t. I want you to read this book carefully. Savor my ideas. Memorize 

pertinent passages. Eat with it, sleep with it, let nature take its course. 

Because what I have dictated is nothing less than a Constitution for the Colbert 

Nation. And, like our Founding Fathers, I hold my Truths to be self-evident, 

which is why I did absolutely no research. 

I didn’t need to. The only research I needed was a long hard look in the mirror. 

For this book is My Story and, as such, it is the American Story. 

I  am  reminded  of  the  words  of  Walt  Whitman,  the  nineteenth-century  poet, 

naturalist, and all around man’s man, who, through his epic lyricism, defined 

Minus the Fruited Plains. 
(See Chapter 7-
Homosexuals) 

the character of this new nation. He said, 

“I celebrate myself, and sing myself, 

And what I assume, you shall assume.” 

That “I” he was talking about? It’s me. 

Bottom line: Read this book. Be me. 

I Am America (And So Can You!) 

by Stephen Colbert 

fig 2. A M E R I C A  

xi 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

H OW TO READ THIS BOOK 

By purchasing I Am America (And So Can You!), you have agreed to treat this 
book with the Accepted Minimum Standard of Respect, as follows: 

• This book should never be marked or notated. This means no highlighting, 

Got it? 

underlining, or margin doodles. 

• This book should never be used as a coaster, to right a wobbly table, in lieu of a 

hammer, a fly swatter, an umbrella, or a fan. 

• No image of me should ever be removed from this book for any purpose, 

including, but not exclusively: book reports, decorating walls, or placing in your 
wallet to imply our friendship. 

• Never press any sort of flowery foliage between pages. I’m allergic. 

• Start with a First Edition and be diligent in upgrading when new editions are 

• May be used to swear in those about to offer testimony if a Bible is not readily 

available. 

available. 

• This book should never have the midsection carved away in order to conceal 

a weapon or jewelry. Those items should be stored either inside the taxidermy 
heads hanging in the trophy room or in the safe behind the painting in the study. 

• This book is the responsibility of the purchaser—Never Loan Out. 

• Ladies may not balance this book on their heads in order to better their posture 
nor steady their hands when applying polish. C’mon, ladies! You know better 
than that. 

• Never dog-ear! Use the Ribbon to mark pages. The Ribbon is included in First 

Editions only! If the book you are reading has a Ribbon and is an official 
authorized First Edition, the “F” on the ribbon should be in large script type, like this: 
F 
If not, you are holding a Chinese counterfeit. Are you still in the store? The man 
behind the counter is a pirate. He might as well have an eye patch and a parrot! 
Don’t panic. Just keep smiling and nodding as if there is nothing wrong. That’s it, 
nod and smile! Good. Now first, buy the book, and then call the police. 

• If your book does not have a Ribbon, these are the appropriate alternate items to 

mark your place in the book: 

• Money (nothing less than a twenty) 
• Another copy of this book. 

xii 

Place this sign by your front entrance where firefighters can see it. 

Part One 

MY AMERICAN CHILDHOOD 

My earliest memory is from when I was three years old. My mother came into 
my room—I can still smell the perfume she was wearing, which I assume they 
don’t  make  anymore,  because  I’ve  spent  a  lot  of  time  in  department  stores 
looking for it. She swooped me up and told me that she and my father were 
leaving me. 

Then  she  carried  me  to  the  living  room  to  meet  Ruth.  I  was  not  entirely 
clear on what a “babysitter” was, so I naturally assumed this old woman was 
going to replace my parents forever. I was not on board with this plan. 

I may have been only three years old, but I already knew that a family was 
a mother, a father, the kids and the pets—there was no room in that model for 
an ancient crone wearing slacks and (in my opinion) too many rings. 

The  minute  my  parents  left,  I  ordered  my  stuffed  animals  to  attack.  No 
response. I threw them down the laundry chute and tried my luck with a real 
animal: our cat, Cleopatra. I carried her to my Emergency Bunker—the linen 
closet  behind  the  vacuum  cleaner.  From  there  we  could  lead  the  resistance 
against this new Ruth Regime. 

That’s when the enemy struck. Ruth was making fish sticks. I held Cleopatra 

close, but she scratched my face and dashed for the kitchen. 

Desperate, I started praying—mostly to God, although it’s possible a prayer 
to Santa may have snuck in there. I prayed He would bring my parents home 
and make our family whole again. 

And when I woke up the next morning, not only had God gotten rid of Ruth 
and brought back my parents, but He had also moved me from the linen closet 
to my own bed. 

Now that’s service. 
Why do I share this memory? Because it perfectly captures the Five Fs of 
childhood: Family, Faith, Furry Friends, and Fear of the Elderly. These are the 
fundamental relationships that teach us Where We Belong, What Belongs to Us, 
and Who We Belong to. 

My second memory is when we went to the zoo, and I saw two rhinos do it. 

3 

fig 3. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C HAPT ER 1  

T HE   FAMI LY 

“Mama’s all right, Daddy’s all right.”
 –Rick Nielsen, dream policeman and father of the 5-neck guitar 

WE 

ARE AT WAR. AND I’M NOT TALKING 

ABOUT THE WAR IN IRAQ, THE WAR 

IN AFGHANISTAN, OR THE WAR ON 

DRUGS. I’M TALKING ABOUT A WAR 

WITH HIGHER STAKES THAN ALL OF THOSE OTHER WARS 

COMBINED AND THEN DIVIDED BY THREE. THE BATTLE-

GROUND  I’M  TALKING  ABOUT?  THE  AMERICAN  FAMILY. 

Think of America as a body. But not in the obvious way where Lake Michigan 

is the eye, Maine is the upturned nose, Texas is the Adam’s Apple, and Florida 

is a really pointy beard. Instead, let’s look deeper, at the biological building 

block of America: the family. 

COLB-QUIZ: What is a family? 

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, a family is defined as two or more people 

living together who are related by birth, marriage or adoption. In other words, 

the U.S. Census Bureau is run by radical leftists. Why do you think there’s a 

whole category for the unemployed? 

If you ask me, from time immemorial, the word “family” has meant only one 

thing:  a  Mom  married  to  a  Pop  and  raising  2.3  rambunctious  little  scamps. 

That’s what’s called The Nuclear Family. It got that name because it reached 

Colb-answer: 
Keep reading! 

Want to be counted? 
Get a job. 

5 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

its peak during the early years of the Cold War, when Americans were in imme-

diate danger of nuclear annihilation. Back then, family members knew their 

roles,  and  nobody  questioned  paternal  authority.  After  all,  Dad  was  the  one 

with the keys to the fallout shelter. 

And it makes 
your hair fall out. 

What  makes  The  Nuclear  Family  so  special?  Well,  just  like  a  real  nuclear 

isotope, it’s incredibly stable. Plus, it’s a convenient shorthand for referring to 

a group of individuals. Think how much time it would take if we had to name 

each individual instead of simply saying “The Johnsons.” That’s time we could 

be spending with our families.1 

WHAT ABOUT NON-TRADITIONAL FAMILIES? 

1. Single Parent Family 

2. Manson Family 

3. Sly and the Family Stone 

Take your pick. 

THAT SOUNDS WONDERFUL: But how do you create a nuclear family of 

your own? It starts with a simple formula: 

MAN + WOMAN = MARRIAGE 

Now, just because that formula is full of letters doesn’t mean it contains vari-

ables. Change it a little and the formula doesn’t work at all. 

MAN + WOMAN ≠ MARRIAGE 

WO + MAN + WOMAN ≠ MARRIAGE 

HU + MAN + WOMAN + ATEE ≠ MARRIAGE 

WO 

WO 

Once you’ve locked up a spouse of the appropriate opposite sex, it’s time to 

Put the “stud” in 
Bible-study. 

get to “know” one another in the biblical sense: by studying the Bible together. 

In it, you’ll find the function of marriage is to provide men and women a safe, 

6 

1 Also, wouldn’t have had time to add this footnote. 

T H E   F  A M I L  Y  

God-approved  context  for  their  wildest  sexual  romps,  the  sole  purpose  of 

which is to produce children. 

So, get to it! 

I’ll wait. 

Hey,  don’t  think  I’m  watching  or  anything.  In  fact,  I’m  gonna  go  around  the 

corner to pick up a bagel and coffee. I’ll leave some music on while I’m gone. 

I’m not listening either, so 
you can really let loose. 

Justice will be served, and the battle will rage. 
This big dog will fight, when you rattle his cage. 
And you’ll be sorry that you messed with the U.S. of A. 
’Cause we’ll put a boot in your ass. It’s the American way! 

I’m  back.  If  Toby  Keith  didn’t  fire  up  your  baby-making  device,  you  should 

check  your  pilot  light.  When  I  listen  to  that  song  during  the  physical  act  of 

Do you smell gas? 

satisfying my lady, I like to think of myself as the dog or the boot, depending 

on my mood. 

THE FATHER 

NOW  WHAT? Now that you’ve produced children, it’s your job to socialize 

them. That means you’ve got a role to play—a role you auditioned for in the 

sack. The minute that baby pops out, you’ve got the part. And if you play it 

right, just like De Niro, you’re going to gain a lot of weight. 

America used to live by the motto “Father Knows Best.” Now we’re lucky if 

“Father  Knows  He  Has  Children.”  We’ve  become  a  nation  of  sperm  donors 

and baby daddies. But there’s more to being a father than taking kids to Chuck 

E. Cheese and supplying the occasional Y-chromosome. A father has to be a 

provider,  a  teacher,  a  role  model,  but  most  importantly,  a  distant  authority 

figure  who  can  never  be  pleased.  Otherwise,  how  will  children  ever  under-

stand the concept of God? 

Every organization needs strong leadership. At home my word is law.2 Whatever 

I  say  goes.  For  instance,  recently  my  son  wanted  a  laptop  computer  for  his 

birthday. I said, “Go ask your mother.” And he did. That’s respect. 

Know how to delegate. 

Stalin: a surprisingly 
good dad. 

2 Literally.  Since I’m one-thirteenth Chickasaw, I pulled some strings and had our family home 
  recognized as a tribal reservation.  Children who disagree with me risk being deported. 

7 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Now, with great power comes great responsibility.3 That’s why a father should 

always wear a collared shirt and carry a tire gauge. Never know when a few 

pounds of air pressure will mean the difference between life and death for you 

Nothing says love like 
proper inflation. 

and your family. 

A father should also work. A lot. Anything less than 100 hours a week and the 

kids are going to get to know Dad and, like the old saying goes, “Familiarity 

breeds contempt.” 

And sure, it’s nice to have a second income to buy the little extras like vacations 

or a place to live, but the mother should never be the primary wage earner. The 

kids  see  that,  lose  respect  for  their  father,  and  decide  to  become  gay  every 

time. It’s known as teenage rebellion, and I’ve seen parades full of it. 

One of Pop’s most important jobs is protecting his little family. That’s why he 

needs to sleep with that 9mm under his pillow. And pack it with hollow point 

bullets. At the least sign of movement in his castle past 8 PM, he should wake up 

I am. 

firing. Let God, Allah, or Hanuman the monkey god sort them out, am I right? 

PUBLISHER’S DISCLAIMER: DO NOT SLEEP WITH A 

9MM UNDER YOUR PILLOW AND SHOOT AT SHADOWS 

Do it. 

IMMEDIATELY UPON WAKING. 

Finally, Dad’s got to protect the weaker minds of his wife and offspring from 

the burden of worry. He can’t show any sign of indecision, financial trouble, or 

even sickness. That’s why it is imperative that fathers never go to the doctor. 

They might find out something is wrong—knowledge which they could never 

share.4  The  crushing  burden  of  stuffing  emotion  for  decades  is  our  nation’s 

number one killer of dads. Or it should be. 

So Dad’s got a pretty tough job. That’s why he needs to be treated right. Don’t 

bother  him  when  he  walks  in  the  door.  Let  him  make  that  martini  or  leaf 

through the latest issue of Wood Boat Enthusiast before you go running to him 

with your affections and/or suspicions about the relationship he may or may 

not be having with the head of Human Resources.5 

8 

3  Ironically, Spiderman had to learn this from his uncle. 
4  A corollary to this rule is that dads should buy a lot of life insurance. I mean tons. 

Enough to make the cops suspicious when he dies. 

5 Wives, never withhold sex as a weapon. It’s a hungry dog that turns over the trash. 

T H E   F  A M I L  Y  

THE MOTHER 

Don’t get me wrong. Being a mom is no picnic. Raising the kids is the mother’s 

responsibility. It’s a thankless, solitary job, like sheriff or Pope. 

On the plus side, they do 
get to wear cool hats. 

The mother-child bond is a fragile thing. That’s why I didn’t let my mom out 

of my sight until two years after I married. But while time apart is hard on the 

kids, it’s devastating for Mom. There’s something I call “The Maternal Instinct.” 

It’s a natural part of every female from the paramecium all the way up to our 

female human woman.6 Females need to nurture constantly, so they hate any 

time  alone  where  they  are  left  to  think,  shower,  or  sleep.  For  a  Mom  to  be 

happy,  every  moment  away  from  her  children  must  be  filled  with  the  soul-

wrenching thought, “Am I a bad mother?” 

The answer to that question is a resounding “Yes.” Scientists have proven, one 

assumes, that every flaw in a child can be traced back to a mistake made by the 

mother. As adults we’re all imperfect, so that means all mothers are incompe-

You already know 
the answer. 

tent. But some mothers are worse than others. Take women who work. I don’t 

care if it’s CEO of a major corporation or three hours a week as a teacher’s 

Except the Virgin Mary 
and my mother.  

aide, if you work outside the home, you might as well bring coconut arsenic 

squares to the school bake sale. 

A mother needs to be in the home even when the kids aren’t. A messy house 

sends a coded message to children: “I’m not loveable. Otherwise Mom would 

dust.” 7 

Messy houses drive boys 
into the arms of bald 
musclemen with earrings. 

A good mother cooks, cleans, drives, organizes charity events so her children 

earn  community  service  points  for  college,  and  expects  nothing  in  return 

except love and breakfast in bed one day a year. 

So,  a  word  to  all  you  Femin-Idi-Amins:  Stop  “liberating”  moms  by  trying  to 

make  them  join  the  workforce. They’re  already  doing  the  job  that  God  put 

them here to do: Everything.8 

6  Apparently paramecia only come in one sex. Sorry that you had to learn that. 
7  Another coded message:  “Can’t your father help you?” means “Feel free to take drugs.” 
8  At least until it’s outsourced to Bangalore.  

9 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

PERSONAL  RECOLLECTION:  It  doesn’t  matter  how  my  parents  raised 

me, because I loved my parents. It’s in the Bible: “Honor thy Mother and 

thy  Father.”  It’s  right  after  the  part  about  stoning  gays.  Sure,  they  could 

be a little “strict,” but I often think back fondly on the memories I haven’t 

I had a happy 
childhood. 

repressed. The truth is, I wouldn’t be the man I am today if it wasn’t for the 

way my parents raised me. And I love the man I am today—which means 

I  love  the  way  my  parents  raised  me.  And  even  if  they  made  mistakes,  I 

don’t  blame  them  for  it,  because  they  tried  their  hardest.  You  can’t  spell 

“parentry” without “try.” 9 Of course, you’ll make a few mistakes. The impor-

tant thing is that the mistakes you make with your kids are the same ones 

Mistake it forward. 

your parents made with you. At least you know how those turn out. 

So now that Mom and Dad know their roles, what’s next? 

RAISING A FAMILY 

Childrearing is arguably the most important of my core values. I believe in it, I 

practice it, and I ceaselessly promote it to my friends and followers. That said, 

generally speaking, I’m against children. 

What’s the matter? Did I shake you up? 

See, I’m not against the conception of children; like I said, they’re the only permis-

sible reason for intercourse. And I’m not against pregnancy—in fact, if you ask 

me,  there’s  nothing  more  beautiful  than  a  third-trimester  mother-to-be  in  full 

If she’s toting a gun, 
that’s just icing. 

maternity regalia. Maybe it’s the elastic, I don’t know. But the effect is stunning. 

Check carefully.  
If it’s one of 
those Cocoons, 
you’re in luck. 

No, my problem is the children themselves. They may be cute, but they are here 

to replace us. Need proof? Ever catch one walking around in your shoes? That’s 

a chilling moment, like finding an empty body snatcher pod in the basement. 

“But  children  are  our  future!”  Yes,  but  does  that  not  also  mean  that  we  are 

their  past?  I  don’t  understand  why  we’re  helping  them.  You  don’t  see  union 

factory workers throwing a benefit for robots. 

I’m sure some of you are thinking, “Why take childrearing advice from someone 

who mistrusts children?” The answer is simple. I respect my opponents. And I 

urge you all to do the same. I wish I could come to each of your houses to help 

10 

9  Also, you can’t spell “emotional abuse” without “bus.” I don’t use public transportation. 

T H E   F  A M I L  Y  

you raise your kids, but I’ve got my hands full with my own children, as well as 

several pending “negligent Big Brother” lawsuits.10 Instead, I offer these simple 

child raising tips. 

TIP NO. 1: SET SOME RULES 

Don’t  worry  if  a  rule  makes  sense—the  important  thing  is  that  it’s  a  rule. 

Arbitrary rules teach kids discipline: If every rule made sense, they wouldn’t 

be learning respect for authority, they’d be learning logic. 

So go crazy with the rules—the time your child spends trying to figure them 

out is time he won’t be stapling firecrackers to the neighbor’s dog. 

Suggested Arbitrary Rules: 

•  Wash your hands before talking to strangers. 

If you look at a cat and it sneezes, no dessert for a week. 

Jell-O must never be jiggled. 

• 

• 

• 

“Red” means “stop,” “green” means “go,” “purple” means “Wednesday.” 

And  if  they  ever  call  “bullshit”  on  your  game,  there’s  an  added  benefit 

there, too. Let me tell you a little story. Once, there was a child whose father 

had lots of rules he thought were unfair. What’s more, the strict father was never 

around, but continued making even more unreasonable demands on the child. 

Finally, the child had had enough—he rebelled, and lived happily ever after. 

Once again, Mr. and 
Mrs. McAllister, I am 
very sorry. 

That child’s name? America. 

TIP NO. 2: THERE CAN BE ONLY ONE  

No matter how many kids you have, you need to pick a favorite. It’s going to 

happen on its own, but it’ll happen faster if you and your spouse have at least 

debated the issue. The important thing is to not tell any of your kids who the 

favorite is—just let them know you have one. That’s a guessing game that will 

keep them occupied and quiet on many a road trip! 

TIP NO. 3: THEY CAN SMELL FEAR 

Never  show  weakness  in  front  of  your  kid.  This  means  never  letting 

them  see  you  cry.  If  you  absolutely  must  cry,  run  into  your  room 

Last name: 
Thebeautiful. 

Every once in a 
while, misspell one 
of their names. 

and  lock  your  door,  then  turn  the  shower  on  and  play  the  stereo  real 

loud—I  suggest  Billy  Joel’s  “Big  Shot.”  When  you’re  done,  tell  your 

“I’m Every Woman” 
works too. 

10  You’d think a national organization could make it clearer that the commitment lasts beyond the photo op. 

11 

You only live through 
your kids once. 

unrealized dreams through your kids, WHEN WILL YOU? 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

kid you were so angry you had to take a shower to cool down, and then deduct 

the cost of the hot water from his allowance. 

TIP NO. 4: DON’T CRY OVER SPILLED MILK 

Unspill it. If you ever wanted to travel back in time to relive your childhood, 

now  you  can—by  living  it  through  your  kid’s  childhood.  Children  are  tiny 

versions  of  you,  minus  the  crushing  failure.  If  you’re  not  going  to  live  your 

Fill them with your dashed hopes and shattered dreams. If they succeed, then 

doesn’t that mean, in some small way, that you yourself succeeded? And if they 

fail, well, then your dream was probably impossible in the first place—though 

your child may want to throw his kids at it, just to make sure. 

THE EXTENDED FAMILY 

Back in the olden days, the family was more than just Ma and Pa and the little 

’uns. There were Ma and Pa’s brothers and sisters and their kids and so on. It 

made for a tight cohesive group that could support each other in hard times. 

Plus,  with  such  close  family  ties,  there  was  always  someone  to  take  up  the 

blood feud if you were gunned down at the feed store. 

But today, too few people live in an extended family. So for my young friends 

reading this at a family reunion and wondering who those people are pinching 

your cheek and breathing onion dip into your face, here’s a crib sheet that 

can help. 

GRANDPARENTS  

Your parents’ parents.  
PRO: Unlike your parents, they have no issue with buying  
your love. 
CON: They grew up in the Depression, and they have never  
adjusted for inflation.  

 

GRANDPARENT SUBCATEGORY: GRANDFATHER 

PRO: He will let you play with his pocket knife and, if you’re  
really lucky, his Luger.  
CON: He will also let you play with his teeth. 

12 

T H E   F  A M I L  Y  

GRANDPARENT SUBCATEGORY: GRANDMOTHER 

PRO: Any food she serves will be full of sugar and fat and 

taste great. 

CON: She has an accent, Grandpa brought her back from the 

War, and she might be a Nazi. Dad said, “Don’t ask.” 

Ask to see her 
collection of 
stolen art! 

AUNTS AND UNCLES 

Your parents’ brothers and sisters.  
PRO: They have a hilarious childhood story about how Mom  
got that scar.  
CON: They are under the impression you should still be  
excited to see them even after they stop bringing presents. 

FAMILY FUN: Your Mom and Her Sister  Is your mom the one who “got 

the  looks”  or  the  one  who  “got  the  brains”?  Either  way,  she  resents  her 

sister for getting the other one! 

FAMILY FUN: Your Dad and His Brother Your bachelor uncle may seem 

like a “cool guy” because he has a boat and a flat-screen TV, and all your dad 

has is you kids. But hang on: In fifty years your uncle won’t have anyone 

to care for him, while your father will be a huge burden on you and your 

family! 

FIRST COUSINS 

Unless you have 
a sister. 

The children of your parents’ brothers and sisters; you 

share grandparents. 

PRO: If you need a kidney, they’ll be a marginally better 

match than someone off the street. 

CON: They may be frauds, posing as your cousins to get 

your kidney. 

KEEP IN MIND: You’ll be competing with these cousins for 

your grandparents’ estate. Start planting false evidence of 

their disloyalty now. 

13 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

SECOND COUSINS 

You share great-grandparents. 

PRO: Their genes are different enough that you can marry 

them without your kids looking like The Hills Have Eyes. 

CON: You can’t find anyone to marry besides your cousin? 

(See Sex and Dating) 

FDR’s excuse was 
polio. What’s yours? 

FIFTIETH COUSINS 

Many geneticists believe that every human on earth is at least  
fiftieth cousin to every other.  
PRO: There’ll be someone to move in with when Social  
Security goes bankrupt.  
CON: You are always at a family reunion.  

FUN  FACT:  Did you know there’s such a thing as “double first cousins”? 

If your dad and his brother married a pair of sisters, then your aunt and 

uncle’s children are your double first cousins! If they’re attached by a fleshy 

band and share major organs, they’re your double first conjoined cousins! 

Or as Tammy Wynette spelled it, “Divorce.” 

Divorce  is  marital  welfare.  It’s  just  couples  asking  society  to  bail  them  out 

because they didn’t do enough research before they got married. How is that 

our fault? Don’t drag down my country’s statistics just because you ran off and 

Mojitos are not a 
shared value! 

got hitched before you ever saw each other in a bad mood. 

These are not valid reasons for divorce: 

Didn’t realize you had to be monogamous. 

Time period covered by pre-nup expired. 

Your married name is something like “Anita Hardcock.” 

Girl you had a crush on in high school just got divorced. 

It’s true! 

DIVORCE 

• 

• 

• 

• 

14 

David Blaine would jump 
at the opportunity. 

T H E   F  A M I L  Y  

PROBLEM  IS:  More  and  more  young  Americans  are  reaching  their  prime 

child-bearing years and making statements like, “Oh, I don’t believe in marriage. 

My parents’ divorce was so terrible that I don’t want to go through the same 

thing.” The next thing you know, they’re either single parents or just single—a 

drain on society either way. 

Our bad example is ruining marriage for our children. That is why, for their 

sake, all American couples must at least fake happiness until their children are 

married. If it will help you through your misery, think of yourselves as magi-

cians, performing a deftly crafted illusion for more than 20 years. 

One way or another, you’ve got to work things out. Do not get a divorce. It’s 

bad for society, it’s in direct opposition to God’s will, and it makes it hard to 

know what people’s last names are.11 

So  walk  it  off.  Work  it  out.  30-day  return  policy,  and  then  no  exchanges. 

America has a thriving marital counseling industry for just this reason. 

COLBERT FAMILY COUNSELING 

No family is without problems, and there’s no shame in acknowledging it by 

shaking your finger at your family members and screaming about how they’ve 

failed you. I have found that one of my many unexpected talents lies in the area 

of family counseling; I can sit down with just about any family and, without 

knowing  a  thing  about  them,  give  them  hours  of  solid  advice.  The  relief  on 

their faces at the end of our “session” is all the reward I ask. 

Now  it’s  your  turn.  Since  I  can’t  meet  face  to  face  with  everyone  who  buys 

this book (unless the sales projections are drastically off), I’d like to offer my 

services in the form of this all-purpose counseling session for a family of four. 

Just circle the choices that apply, and I think you’ll find that these are words 

to live by.12 

(Note: By reading these words you acknowledge that Stephen T. Colbert bears 

no legal responsibility for the consequences of living by them.) 

11  Annulment, on the other hand, is a fantastic option if you’re in a sticky spot. All you have to do is prove to a 
church tribunal that there was a canonical impediment to your marriage which made the sacrament invalid 
when it was performed. That last, “when it was performed” thing is the tricky part. For instance, if you’re 
really stuck on getting a divorce, you can just cheat on your wife once, and that’s grounds. For an annul-
ment, you have to prove that you fully intended to cheat on your wife even before you got married. That’s 
tough, because most guys don’t know their nannies before they get married. 

12  Or die by.  I’ve got an all-purpose eulogy that uses the same system. 

15 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Happy healing! 

Welcome, Mom, Dad, Evan and Kimberly. I’m very encouraged by the fact that 

you (sought/were ordered into) family counseling, and I think together we can 

make a lot of progress. I’ve studied your family dynamic and I’d like to address 

each of you in turn. 

Dad, it’s quite obvious to me that you need to (spend more time at home/get a 

job), in order to relieve the enormous strain put on the family by your constant 

(absence/presence).  If  you  were  (more/less)  involved  in  family  life,  (Evan/ 

Kimberly/Mom) might feel some relief from the pressure that drives (his/her) 

struggle  with  (authority/drugs/pimples/cooking  sherry).  By  the  same  token, 

your (increased/decreased) presence might also allow (Evan/Kimberly/Mom) 

the perspective to decide whether (he/she) is (considering/rejecting) a career 

in  (sports/medicine/sports  medicine/law/jazz  dance)  because  (he/she)  really 

wants to, or in order to (please/infuriate) you. To put it simply, they need you 

to be at (work/home). It’s time to take another look at your (priorities/résumé) 

and put yourself (out there/back here). 

Now you, Mom. You must accept the fact that your decision to (quit/go back 

to) (work/school/drinking/Jenny Craig/your meds), while obviously a personal 

step  (forward/backward)  for  you,  also  has  consequences  for  the  family. 

Remember, emotionally you have always been their (pillar of strength/ powder 

keg), and the idea that your life choices will now be made with an eye toward 

(your  career/family  life/logic)  can  take  some  getting  used  to.  Don’t  forget, 

you’re  at  a  crossroads  yourself,  with  the  children  getting  (older/fatter)  and 

soon to be off to (college/rehab/war/Quiznos). They may not tell you, but they 

(still/no  longer)  need  you  to  (loosen/tighten/trim)  the  (apron  strings/reins/ 

hedges). Let them know that you’re (still/not) their (mom/maid/warden/camel 

drover), and I think you’ll find them more than willing to (meet you halfway/ 

Evan, I know that (making/not making) the (football team/debate club/dance 

troupe)  has  you  feeling  a  lot  of  pressure.  But  no  problem  was  ever  really 

move out). 

16 

T H E   F  A M I L  Y  

solved by (drugs/drinking/Santeria). And (lashing out at/ignoring/massaging) 

your  (parents/sister/teammates/priest)  isn’t  the  answer  either.  Maybe  it  will 

help if you think of the family as a (race car/video game/robot arm). All the 

parts have to work together if you’re going to (win/win/carefully manipulate 

the space shuttle’s bay doors closed). And as far as the problem you’ve been 

having with your (grades/chronic masturbation), I truly believe that the simple 

answer is just a little (more/less) time spent (studying/working your crank). 

Now  you,  Kimberly.  I’ll  be  blunt:  You  need  to  (gain/lose)  weight.  Your  body 

image  issues  are  only  masking  a  deeper  (anxiety/indifference/rage)  that  is 

the  same  impulse  behind  your  (attaching/detaching)  yourself  (from/to)  the 

school’s (in/out/geek/Goth/nerd/jock/preppie/hippie/stoner/loner/Christer) 

crowd.  Can  we  address  the  possibility  that  your  (binging/purging/cutting/ 

piercing/tattooing/promiscuity/meth use) is just your way of asking for your 

family’s (love/attention/destruction)? When left to your own devices you can 

be a very (kind/manipulative/frightening) young lady, and you shouldn’t leave 

it  to  others  to  (validate/expose)  your  (worth/crimes  against  humanity).  The 

(possibilities/sentences)  for  (young  people/juvenile  offenders)  are  (greater/ 

harsher) than ever before. (Embrace/Avoid) them. 

All right. I’m (glad/sorry) to say this has been a (very/fairly) (productive/disap-

pointing) session, but I am aware of the (time/smoldering trash fire Evan lit), 

so I’ll see you next week. 

17 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  F  O R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  A  G R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

I shan’t say I have never felt the thrilling touch of an 

amorous embrace, but I also shan’t shan’t say it, for I was 

raised in a refined era when ladies did not amorously-embrace-

and-tell. (For the record: It was vigorous necking that once 

descended to the upper shoulder!) 

Oh, I have loved. 

Every fortnight, I water the shriveled bouquet of roses given 

to me at the debutante ball by my suitor, Horace O’Conner, the 

Dolores Grierson, 
Old Maid 

man I hoped to marry. But I was too spirited and willful and I 

spurned his proposal. I wanted to wait until I was seventeen. 

away, I vowed that I would find a purpose for my life other than marriage and family. 

But I mustn’t linger on memories of Horace! After he moved 

My search was as fruitless as my womb. 

On the bright side, if I had raised a family, who would have raised my cats, my 

wonderful, wonderful cats? What would have become of Tiger, and Cupcake, and 

Professor Snugglepuss? Who would put out milk for Princess Sheba, and Dartagnan 

the Mouseketeer? Who would knit personalized collars for Footloose, Fancy-Free, Mr. 

Whiskers and Mrs. Chievous-Whiskers (nee Miss Chievous), Ol’ Blacky, Princess Grace 

Kitty, Queen Neferkiti, Old King Cat, Arsenic, Old Lace, and Adjunct Professor Mimsy? 

Yes, I’ve had a full life. Let me show you a page from my diary. 

6:30 am: Overslept. Queen Neferkiti is not pleased.

6:45 am: Prepared breakfast of poached eggs, jam and toast, and fried sausages. 

6:53 am: Prepare my breakfast.

7:00 am: Ate my bowl of Wheatena. 
7:30 to Noon: Wrote and mailed letters to relatives, most of whom are all deceased.  
Over the next few weeks, the letters will trickle back stamped “return to sender.”  
It’s so nice to get mail! 
Noon to 12:30: Stared. 
12:30 to 1:45: Embroidered a slip for my pillow—singular. 
2:00: A visit from the postman! The fall issue of Cat Fancy is here!

2:15 to 7:00: Fancied my cats in accordance with latest cat-fancying trends.

7:30: The neighborhood children threw rocks at “ Fearsome Grierson’s” door. I  
wanted to shout at them, “That doesn’t even rhyme!” but instead, I watched  
silently from behind the shutters. They will get theirs... 
7:40: ...And How!

8:00 to 9:00 pm: Updated will. Professor Snugglepuss is in for a wonderful 

 

surprise. 
The other cats will have to understand. 
9:00 pm: Lights out! Good night, my feline companions! 
Midnight: …Goodnight, Horace. 

FUN 

ZONE 

OPTICAL ILLUSION 

Look at your brunette wife for a very, very, very long time. 

Then shift your gaze over your fence to the neighbor’s backyard. 

Do you see a hot, young blonde? I recommend you don’t! 

fig 4. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C H APT ER  2  

OL D   P E OPLE 

“Hope I die before I get old.”
 –Pete Townshend, living old person 

NEWS 

FLASH:  DID  YOU  NOTICE  HOW  BIG 

THE  WORD  “NEWS”  WAS  AT  THE 

BEGINNING  OF  THIS  PARAGRAPH? 

I  CONSIDERED  MAKING  ALL  THE 

WORDS  IN  THIS  CHAPTER  THAT  BIG.  AND  NOT  JUST 

BECAUSE  I  CAN’T  THINK  OF  A  QUICKER  WAY  TO 

FILL  240  PAGES.  THAT  WAS  A  JOKE,  IN  CASE  YOU 

couldn’t tell. I don’t blame you if you couldn’t. Can’t tell if someone’s making a 

joke if you can’t see that person’s face. Big reason I don’t like books. No faces. 

Can’t tell when they’re being funny. 

Being Funny 

Point is, I’m writing about seniors here, and old folks can’t read anything that’s 

not printed in a 30-point font or above. To them, this paragraph looks like an 

ant fight. Sad thing is, if they try to use a magnifying glass, the page catches 

on fire. I’ve always thought someone should fix that about magnifying glasses.  Why not call it a 
“magna-frying 
Major design flaw. 
glass?” 

Anyway, even though seniors can’t make out most of the words in this book, 

I thank them for reading it. 

21 

If seniors could read this, 
I would thank them 
here, too. 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Thank you for reading 
this, seniors. 

I must say, writing a whole chapter directed at seniors is a waste of time. Can’t 

teach an old dog new tricks—they’re too tired. Plus, they’re from the library 

card  generation.  They  share  books.  They  don’t  believe  in  buying  multiple 

collectors’ copies, no matter what kind of rare, bizarre misprint appears in the 

first edition 

. No disrespect, but old people are 

useless to me. So, this chapter is now re-directed at all of you not-yet-seniors. 

Plus: Since seniors can’t read this, I can say whatever I want about them. 

They look like lizards. 

See? No angry letters. By now, some of the older readers out there are prob-

ably thinking, “What’s that Colbert boy going on about?” Let’s not forget about 

them. 

It is the duty 
of all Americans 
to respect and 
cherish our elders. 

GUT SPEAKING: “An old man is a repository of failed ideas.” 

—Johann Goethe, a German writer 

I made this quote up. 

22 

O L D   P E O P L E  

SOME GOOD THINGS ABOUT SENIORS 

•  

•  

They are the Greatest Generation. No other generation in history has  
ever been quite so willing to be poor, fight wars, or have babies. 
They were alive in the Good Old Days. They’re living testament to a  
time when America was #1, and so was butterscotch.  

•   My Mom is one of them. If you have a problem with old folks, you  

•  

have a problem with my Mom. So let me ask you, punk, do you have  
a problem with my Mom? ’Cause I’d love hear about it! 
They are often forgiven for racial intolerance. 

I love 
you, 
NOW  THE  BAD  NEWS:  After  criminals  and  babies,  seniors  are  the  most Mom.

coddled segment of the population. They have everything given to them, from 

pensions to discount meals to help crossing the street. And despite all they get, 

they complain. 

NEWS  FLASH:  It’s  not  seniors’  fault  that  they’re  such  whiners.  There’s 

someone else to blame: Franklin D. Roosevelt, who gave our country Social 

Security, a system which rewards seniors for doing nothing. 

Sorry, but retirement offends me. You don’t just stop fighting in the middle of a 

war because your legs hurt. So why do you get to stop working in the middle of 

your life just because your prostate hurts? That’s desertion, which in my book 

gets you the early bird special at the firing squad buffet. 

Our elders 
are a precious 
resource. 

23 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

LIKE I SAID: Ever since I was a kid I’ve been baffled by retirement, pensions, 

and S.S. Want proof? Look what I found in the Colbert attic archives. Couldn’t 

have been more than seven when I wrote it: 

24 

O L D   P E O P L E  

POINT  IS:  S.S.  didn’t  make  sense  to  me  as  a  seven-year-old,  and  it  doesn’t 

make sense to me now. 

SS—why do those 
initials sound 
familiar? 

Think of it this way: If an alien came down from the Galaxy and told you that 

on his planet they have a system where all the young, hardworking aliens give 

up a large number of their glixnards for the benefit of the non-working elder 

vorzoths, and that by the time they were ready to become vorzoths themselves 

(a process involving the ingestion of a sacred mineral which renders the fore-

limbs useless for work in the plthkana mines), the glixnard cisterns might be 

dangerously depleted, you bet your sweet bippy you’d have a lot of questions. 

And yet, our human American “vorzoths” (seniors) have banded together to 

preserve their hoard of “glixnards” (money) at the expense of the young. They 

call this group the “AARP,” which probably stands for something, but to me, 

sounds like the noise an old man makes when he’s trying to get out of a bean 

bag chair. 

SO WHAT DO WE DO ABOUT THESE YEAR-HOGGERS? 

Is  there  a  solution  to  America’s  Elderly  Crisis  that  doesn’t  involve  changing 

our lives in any way or making us feel guilty? Yes. Think of the money in the 

Social Security “Trust Fund” as investment capital. Right now, we’re putting 

that  money  into  millions  of  small-cap,  zero-yield  investments:  The  Jazzy® 

Set. No offense, but unless Leo and Dolores Shipner of Forest Hills suddenly 

decide to get off their apple pancake asses and personally invade Iran, we’re 

not getting value for our money. We need to utilize seniors’ strengths to get a 

Shipners successfully 
invaded Olive Garden. 

return on our investment. 

Are you still awake? 

I’m not going to win any awards for saying this, but the elderly are like rude 

party guests. They came early, they’re always in the bathroom, and now they 

Prove me wrong,  
Pulitzers! 

just won’t leave. I say we do the same thing to them that I do with stragglers at 

my shin-digs. Put them to work cleaning the place up. 

Only this time, the place is called America. 

Ring a bell? 

25 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Let’s use ’em to shut down our porous Southern Border. One thing Old People 

have a knack for is keeping kids off their lawn. I remember growing up, old 

man  Schmidt  would  sit  in  that  rocking  chair  of  his  like  he  was  manning  a 

guard tower at a Nazi prison camp. One misstep onto his immaculate “Master 

Lawn” was enough to trigger the old man’s shriek of “Auf Meine Grass! Das 

ist Verboten!” I say, let’s build a 2000-mile-long front porch along our border 

with Mexico and line it with the angry aged. When the Mexicans try to cross, 

Guardpas?  they’ll be turned into Mexican’ts™ when a million Grampas bellow: 

“Get off my country! I just seeded!” 

Plus, they’re suckers for heat. 

Hey! Anybody want a 
free trip to California, 
Arizona, New Mexico, 
and /or Texas? 

Are they up to the job? Make no bones about it, old people are tough. Many 

of  them  grew  up  having  to  scrap  for  every  penny.  They  made  shoes  out  of 

newspaper and twine, and subsisted on a thin stew of newspaper and twine. 

Sometimes  they  had  to  go  without  shoes  and  stew  altogether  so  that  there 

would be enough newspaper and twine to treat the baby’s Scarlet Fever. I’d 

say they can handle Jose. 

Of  course,  the  simplest  answer  to  the  problem  of  the  aged  is  for  people  to 

stop getting old. There was a time I thought this was impossible. But that was 

before I developed my Age-Defying Protein Pudding! 

It’s based on a high gelatin diet that has kept cow hooves supple for centuries. 

I’m proud to make it available for the first time in this book. 

26 

O L D   P E O P L E  

27 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  F  O R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  A  G R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

A lot of senior citizens will tell you that they miss the “good 

old days.” Not me. I never cared for them much. Besides, what 

was so good about them? Between 1918 and 1920, close to 100 

million people died of Spanish Flu. Whoopee! Break out the 

party hats. 

Perhaps these same seniors miss the Great Depression, too. 

I know I have fond memories of beating a hobo for scraps of 

cantaloupe rind. Ah, if only that bloody bindle could fit in my 

Gill Honeycomb, 
the Oldest Man 
in the World 

scrapbook. 

Oh, and let’s not forget the joy of racism. You wouldn’t 

believe the horrible things they called African-Americans and 

the Irish back then. I still can’t eat potato salad without thinking of Eugene O’Neill. 

No, thank you. I much prefer the present. Things are so much better today. Take 

medicine. In the old days, you’d go see a doctor and he’d write you a prescription for 

a carton of Viceroy cigarettes. I lost my beloved Doris to appendicitis because the 

doctor said her T-zone wasn’t getting enough smooth flavor. 

No, the only good thing about the past is that the Chicago Cubs would occasionally 

win the World Series. But that’s it. Everything else was Nazis and disease. 

I just thank God I’m alive to see the world today. To see with my own eyes all the 

wonderful advances in medicine, society, and technology. I’m so lucky that I can 

enjoy all that the modern world has to offdfjkkzdfjlhgkgfkktdkftfrrkltlilgklffffffffffff 

fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff 

fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff 

fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff 

ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff 

(Editor’s Note: We would like to congratulate the new Oldest Man in the World, Nobutane 

Matsuhara, age 113. Get your thoughts together for the paperback edition, Nobu!) 

FUN 

ZONE 

HELP THE OLD MAN FIND HAPPINESS 

fig 5. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C H APT ER  3  

A NI MA L S 

“I’m a monkey!”
 –Mick Jagger, lead singer of The Monkees 

HUMANS 

ARE  IN  CHARGE  OF  THIS  PLANET, 

AND IT’S A PRECARIOUS POSITION. 

THERE ARE SIX BILLION OF US, BUT 

IF  MY  PEST  CONTROL  BILL  IS  ANY 

INDICATION, THERE’S AT LEAST THAT MANY SQUIRRELS 

IN  MY  ATTIC.  I  DON’T  KNOW  HOW  MUCH  MORE 

POISON  I  CAN  SQUIRT  UP  THERE.  I’M  GETTING  WOOZY. 

It’s clear that when we’re this outnumbered by the creatures, we have to take 

a page from the British Empire and rule the lesser species through intimida-

tion.  That’s why the single most important thing you can do as a human is to 

dominate an animal. Need more proof? 

“Rule  over  the  fish  of  the  sea  and  the  birds  of  the  air  and  over  every  living  YAHWEH 
creature that moves on the ground.” I’d say that about covers it. Because if we 

October 23, 4004 B.C. 

didn’t dominate the animals, you better believe they’d be dominating us.  And 

that’s a scenario so horrific not even Hollywood could produce it. But here’s a 

brief treatment, just in case they would care to. 

31 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

1
Spoiler alert: It isn’t! 

!1

32 

1 Planet Animal 2: Moon Animals! 

A N I M A L S  

MAKE A DIFFERENCE! 

This  little  nightmare  I  have  just  described  (and  registered  with  the  Writers 

Guild) is why I strongly recommend getting a pet—any pet—and dominating 

it. It’s the best way to remind the animal kingdom who’s the boss. Plus, nothing 

is more satisfying than subjugating a lower creature to your will. When I tell 

my dog Gipper to fetch my slippers, I feel a sense of rightful empowerment, 

placing myself at the apex of Nature’s Org Chart. 

Of course, Gipper has very sensitive legs, so when I ask him to fetch me some-

thing,  I  have  to  physically  carry  him  over  to  that  spot  and  pick  up  the  item 

myself. But believe me, he gets the idea. 

Don’t you, boy! 
Oh yes you do! 

For  a  human,  dominating  an  animal  should  be  as  natural  as  smoking  a 

turkey. And yet it’s a joy that many adults no longer experience. And do you 

know why? 

Because from the time you’re a little kid, the media are feeding you lies to put 

the power structure out of whack. So before you become a pet owner, there 

are a few things you need to understand in order to put the power structure in 

of whack. 

WHEN YOU WISH UPON A LIE 

Some would have our children believe that animals are cute and cuddly. It starts 
the day we bring baby Kyle or Kallie or Kayla or Kaitlyn or Kelsie home from  Kieran , Kylie, 
Kristal, Kinsley, 
the hospital to a room wallpapered in adorable little yellow ducks. Why aren’t  Kira, Kstephen 

these ducks being pursued by adorable little yellow hunters? I don’t know, but 

I’m willing to bet that it has something to do with the Far Left media’s control 

of the wallpaper industry. (Yes, I consider the wallpaper industry part of the 

media. It has the word “paper” in it.) 

What’s  the  very  first  book  most  children  own?  A  bit  of  blatant  propaganda 

called Pat the Bunny. 

Better Option: Paté the Bunny! 

I’m on to you,  
toilet paper. 

Feel how smooth 
this page is. 

33 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Pat the Bunny isn’t 
a good book 

I’m not saying Pat  the  Bunny isn’t a good book. There’s that soft patch of 

fur  on  page  one  for  you  to  pat.  And  then  there’s  the  smooth  part  and  the 

scratchy part and don’t get me started on the mirror! There is so much to do, 

and you don’t even need to know how to read. That’s the perfect book. But a 

pro-bunny manifesto with that kind of sensory stimulation? What chance do 

All Dogs Go to Heaven? Sorry, kids. It’s only the dogs who’ve accepted 

our children have? 

Christ. 

HICKORY DICKORY SHOCK! 

You may now  
unbrace. 

Then there are the nursery rhymes. What’s a cuter image than three little kittens 

that have lost their mittens? Well, brace yourself: Kittens don’t wear mittens. 

I’m going to let that sink in. And why don’t they wear mittens? Because they’d 

just get caught on their razor-sharp claws. 

Personally  I  prefer  the  Three  Blind  Mice,  because  1)  they’re  already  handi-

capped  when  the  song  starts—as  a  result,  no  doubt,  of  some  anti-human 

scheme that blew up in their faces, and 2) they’re further maimed in the course 

Stay strong,  
Farmer’s Wife!   

of the rhyme. 

The list is endless. The cartoon characters: dogs, cats, rabbits, ducks, horses, 

squirrels, gorillas, all of them talking, all of them so very human. Of course, the 

most famous offender is Bambi, which, for reasons that escape me, portrays 

the death of a deer negatively. You can bet you’ll never see an animated classic 

about what Bambi’s mom devoured for her last meal—my defenseless oakleaf 

hydrangea! 

“Cowtow”! 
It’s right there in the  
name! 

My point is this: if America is ever to stop cowtowing to the animal-petters, 

we have to get to our youth before they do. Children have to learn that these 

animals aren’t our buddies. Sometimes it’s a tough lesson. 

BUT WHAT ABOUT ME? 

When I was a kid, I had a dog named Shasta. We were inseparable. We’d play 

in the backyard, maybe chase a ball, or just go splashin’ around the ol’ creek. 

Shasta was my best friend. 

34 

A N I M A L S  

Then after fourteen happy years together, I came home from school one day 

and Shasta didn’t greet me at the door. My mom and dad sat me down and told 

me the terrible news: Shasta had gone to live on a big beautiful farm upstate. 

I couldn’t believe it. I never felt so betrayed in my life. I thought Shasta and I 

were a team. But as soon as some smooth-talking stranger came along with 

the promise of a bigger field, she was gone. And that’s how it is with animals. 

Always looking for a better offer. 

Sorry  I  wasn’t  a  farmer,  Shasta.  The  suburb  had  zoning  laws—we  couldn’t 

grow crops in the yard. How could you? 

I pressed my parents for answers, but my mom wouldn’t stop crying, and my 

Dad  just  kept  saying  that  she  was  chasing  rabbits.  Chasing  rabbits?  I  guess 

Shasta was lying to me about that degenerative hip disease, too. 

So wake up, America. 

Pets. Don’t. Care. About. You. They’re just using you for food, and for the social 

networking you provide when you walk them. 

But  the  joke’s  on  you,  Shasta.  If  you’re  reading  this  (or  having  your  farmer 

friend  read  it  to  you),  you  should  know  that  I  have  a  new  dog,  Gipper.  And 

Gipper is twice the dog you’ll ever be. His coat is way shinier than yours, and 

he doesn’t chew up my comic books. And he hates farms.  Gipper will never 

betray me, and he’s never going to leave me. He’s been right by my side for the 

last fifteen years, and he’ll be there for the next fifty. 

So if animals aren’t our friends, then what are they? 

The answer can be summed up between two buns. 

Yet another reason not to  
give to Farm Aid 

I wonder whose face she  
was thinking of when she  
was licking mine? 

No more catnaps.  
From now on: mannaps. 

35 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

THE FACTORY FARM: AMERICA’S MOST SUCCULENT INDUSTRY 

Nation, have you ever wondered how a cow becomes a hamburger? Me neither. 

I just assumed God did it. But it turns out that food production is actually part 

of something called Agribusiness. It’s this industry that turns cows into steaks, 
pigs into bacon and everything else into gelatin.  

“Everything else” 
includes, someday, 
Bill Cosby. (Should  
have read the fine  
print.) 

THE MIRACLE OF MEAT 

36 

A N I M A L S  

THE U.S.D.A. AND Y.O.U. 

Agribusiness  in  the  United  States  is  overseen  by  the  United  Just one “n” away 

from Angry-Business! 

States  Department  of  Agriculture.  Translation:  just  more  Big 

Government interference. Hey, if I want to buy meat out of the 

trunk of some guy’s car, that’s my business. My Agribusiness. 

Here’s  my  second  problem.  The  food  pyramid.  There  is  no  greater  friend  of 

the State of Israel than Yours Truly, and I for one believe it is criminal that the 

USDA would use an army of Jewish slaves to build these monuments just so 

school kids can be force-fed the Whole Grain Agenda.

 HEY PHAROAH TUTEN-RAMEN-NOODLE! 

LET MY PEOPLE GO-GURT! 

37 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

WHO CARES? 

Upton  Sinclair  wrote  a  pro-labor  book  about  the  Chicago  stockyards  called 

The  Jungle  that  pointed  out  minor  flaws  in  the  meat  industry,  such  as  the 

frequency of severed limbs. Big deal. I knew an accountant who got his arm 

chopped off in a filing cabinet. But you’ll never hear about that in a book. 

Truth is, Upton Sinclair was a Socialist, which means what he really wanted 

was  for  cattle  to  control  the  distribution  of  wealth.  One  guess  who they’d 

He kept the arm 
and claimed it as a 
dependent. 

give it to. 

THE TRUTH: IT’S WHAT’S FOR DINNER. 

Now  some  people  complain  that  the  factory  scale  of  Agribusiness  means 

cruelty to animals, environmental destruction, and meat loaded with chemi-

cals and hormones. 

READY, PET, GO! 

But they’re not awarding any points for the fact that on the factory farm, a cow 

can go from mooing to stewing in under ninety seconds. 

Okay. Now that I’ve pulled the wool off your eyes about animals, you’re ready 

to get one and establish the proper dominant relationship. 

It’s important to select the right animal. Different lifestyles call for different 

pets to master. If you’re away from your home a lot, you may want to boss 

around a cat. If you don’t like to exercise, consider lording over an iguana or 

perhaps a weak-willed parakeet. But if you do have the time to dedicate, there 

is no beast more satisfying to dominate than the dog. 

Once you’ve selected a pet and named it, it’s time to bend the animal to your 

will. I’ve done this with my dog Gipper by teaching him a few authoritative 

commands, such as SIT. When I order Gipper to sit, I’m letting him know that 

I am his superior. Of course, Gipper has a bad back, so after I ask him to sit, I 

massage his hindquarters while I ease him onto a pillow. 

What’s on Top of a House? It’s “roof.” Not “ruff.” 

Make sure your dog says “roof.” 

If you want to be a 
real asshole, get a 
ferret. 

38 

A N I M A L S  

Just  like  with  humans,  dogs  determine  what  type  of  person  you  are  by  the 

firmness of your handshake. If you have a strong grip, they’ll respect you. If 

you have a weak grip, they’ll turn your neck into a chew toy. So be sure to give 

For Masonic dogs, try 
clutching the elbow. 

your dog’s paw a hearty squeeze and NEVER break eye contact. Of course, my 

dog Gipper doesn’t like to be touched, so when I ask him to shake, I bow to 

him Japanese-style while averting my gaze. 

THE DE-BALLIFICATION OF THE AMERICAN PETSCAPE 

Anyone who has ever spent $5 to purchase a newborn dachshund out of a card-

board box in a supermarket parking lot knows the joy of a litter of puppies. 

Without them the desk calendars of our nation’s secretaries would be blank. 

Don’t let someone 
else’s pets read this 
book. Have your 
animal mark its 
territory: 

But there is a movement afoot in this country, spearheaded by certain octo-

genarian game show hosts, to spay and neuter our pets, ostensibly to control 

HERE 

their population. Instead of letting animals be animals these people choose to 

“Cut and Run.” 2 

At  its  very  core,  this  scissor-happy  movement  is  an  affront  to  virility  and  is 

brazenly  anti-ball.  Think  of  the  agony  you  put  your  neutered  dog  through 

when, during a simple game of fetch, you ask him to chase down and retrieve 

a symbol of his lost manhood. The Anti-Cruelty Society is performing these 

procedures! 3 And they say irony is dead! 

Apparently it’s just 
playing, ‘possum 

Worst  of  all,  neutering  is  birth  control,  plain  and  simple.  Instead  of  the 

wholesale de-sacking of these creatures, we should be promoting abstinence 

education for our pets. They will get the same satisfaction teenagers do from 

remaining chaste until they are married. And yes, I am once again advocating 

Not animal gay 
marriages! 

animal marriages. 

2  A major weapon in the War on Testicles is language. What do we call the offspring of our cats and dogs? 

39 

Not a “Bounty” or a “Blessing” but a “Litter”! 

3  One minute they’re telling you how important it is to save some endangered species no one has ever heard 
of, the next they’re begging you to neuter your pets. Which is it, more animals or less? You can’t have your 
Spotted Owl 4 and eat it too. 

4  For the record, delicious. 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )

ON ENDANGERED SPECIES

To put it simply, certain animals are endangered because God is pissed off at 

them.  If  you  try  to  save  an  endangered  animal,  you  are  going  against  God’s 

will—and the Man knows how to hold a grudge. 

ENDANGERED ANIMALS 
and
WHY THEY ARE UNLOVED BY GOD

Florida Cougar
(Puma Concolor Coryi)
Laziness. Where’s 
the challenge in 
hunting slow, 
elderly prey?

California
Condor
(Gymnogyps californianus)
Typical West Coast 
type just cruising on 
the air currents. Get 
a job, long beak. 

Hawaiian
Monk Seal
(Monachus schauinslandi)
Despite name, not 
really a devout 
member of a 
monastic order.

Ocelot
(Leopardus pardalis) 
It knows good and 
well what it did. 

Père David’s 
Deer
(Elaphurus davidianus)
Has an accent mark 
in its name.

Bighorn Sheep
(Ovis canadensis) 
Wool can only 
be washed on 
“delicate” cycle, 
if you know 
what I mean.

Iberian Lynx
(Lynx pardinus) 

Agnostic.

Hairy-Nosed
Wombat
(Lasiorhinus krefftii) 

Unloveable.

40

A N I M A L S  

I Went to the Zoo Once: Not impressed. The animals were lazy. If I want to 

see a monkey sleeping, I’ll tranquilize one. But what do you expect from today’s 

modern  zoos?  Now  every  animal  has  its  own  habitat—Bear  Country,  Tiger 

Mountain, Hedgehog Hotel, Baboon Condo. It’s so safe and sterile. How are 

my kids supposed to learn anything about nature if the animals aren’t savaging 

If I went to a play 
and all the actors 
were asleep, I’d get 
a refund. 

one another? I say we put all the animals into one big enclosure and let them 

battle it out. After all, it’s a dog-eat-dog world; so let’s have some dogs eating 

each other. Not my dog Gipper, though. He has a very sensitive stomach. 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  F  O R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  T  O  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

I’d like to thank Stephen for the opportunity to put my 

two cents in here. To be honest, I was hesitant to commit my 

thoughts to paper. The last thing I want to do is perpetuate the 

illusion that I actually have thoughts.  Dinner doesn’t think, and 

you shouldn’t think about your dinner. 

Hey, want to hear a funny joke? Cattle prods. 

I guess you had to be there. 

L73NR, Cow 

opportunity to be processed into sirloin, Farmer Joe thinks he 

It’s just that I don’t understand why, after offering me the 

needs to twist my hoof. I’m in! 

What’s that honey? In a minute, Mommy is writing something for a book. That’s 

right! B-O-O-K! Book! Good girl! Now run along and tell your sister it’s time for bed. 

You know, Mohandas Gandhi once said, “The cow is a poem of compassion,” but you 

know what I say?  The cow is a rack of short ribs. 

Speaking of Gandhi, it’s at times like these (approaching the mechanical separa-

tors), that I am glad I’m a Hindu. Because I know I have lived a good life and will come 

back to live again and again until I escape the wheel of Samsara. When I next return, 

I hope I’m a human. The first thing I’m going to do is have a steak. I’m dying to know 

what all the fuss is about. You people sure seem eager to get it off my bones. 

Well I should sign off before I get to the Captive Bolt Stunner.

  Enjoy me! 

41 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

CANARY IN A COAL MINE 

Nation, nothing restricts freedom more than buckling a seatbelt. If I want to 

fly head first through my car windshield at 200 mph, that’s between me and 

my brain damage. But, as long as there are legislators in the pocket of Big 

Seatbelt, the regulations will keep on coming. 

Don’t believe me? Take a look at this story from abcnews.com: 

BUCKLE UP, PUP 
For  Massachusetts  canines,  flatbed  freedom  and  tongues  flapping  in 
the breeze on the open road may soon go to the dogs. Martin Walsh, a 
state  lawmaker  from  Dorchester,  Mass.,  may  file  legislation  that  will 
require dog owners to restrain pets when driving in a vehicle. 

A law to make dogs wear seatbelts! What’s next, Massachusetts? Making 

dogs wear hard hats when they chase the ball? Or life vests when they swim 

in a lake? Or safety goggles when they spot-weld? 

Never  once  did  Lassie  tell  Timmy  she  wanted  more  government  regula-

tions. “What’s that, girl? There’s a fire in the old barn? You want me to fill 

out this paperwork in triplicate and wait for someone from the main branch 

to contact me in six to eight weeks?” Ridiculous. 

  Half  the  reason  the  comic  strip  Marmaduke  is  so  funny  is  because  he’s 

always  getting  into  mischief.  If  the  government  starts  regulating  that 

mischief  with  a  bunch  of  unnecessary  safety  standards,  that  Great  Dane 

will become a Mediocre Dane. Then where will we turn for entertainment? 

Cathy? Too highbrow!  

Massachusetts,  you’ve  already  taken  our  dogs’  balls.  Don’t  take  their 

Endangered Species 

rights too. 

42 

FUN 

ZONE 

Can you re-ball the boys before Sandy is out of heat? 

Draw a line from the missing sack to the right breed! 

Weimaraner 

Schnauzer 

Irish Setter 

Doberman 

English Setter 

Golden Retriever 

Bob Barker 

fig 6. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C HAPT ER 4  

R E L I GI ON 

“Jesus is just all right with me.”
 –The Doobie Brothers 

But are they all right with Jesus? Drop the reefer, boys, and pick up a Bible! 

BAD 

NEWS FOR THE GODLESS: RELIGION 

IS INESCAPABLE. THERE HAS NEVER 

BEEN A HUMAN SOCIETY WITHOUT 

SOME  FORM  OF  WORSHIP.  AND 

DON’T POINT TO COMMUNIST SOCIETIES LIKE THE SOVIET 

UNION—THEY  WORSHIPPED  BLUE  JEANS.  OF  COURSE, 

BEATNIKS,  PEACENIKS,  AND  NO-GOODNIKS  QUESTION 

why we need religion. “Imagine,” they croon, “there’s no countries. It isn’t hard, 

it’s true. Nothing to fight or kill for, and no religion, too.” You may find that 

idea appealing because it rhymes. But so does this: “God said to Noah there’s 

gonna be a floody-floody / Get those children out of the muddy-muddy.” 

Mine rhymes 4 times. 

The  “children”  mentioned  in  that  Bible  verse  didn’t  think  they  needed  reli-

gion either, and look what happened to them (drowny-drowny). Bottom line: 

Religion is the cornerstone of civilization. Without it, we would have no laws, 

no morality, no social structure, and no guidelines for furnishing our taberna-

cles. We would exist in a state of valueless depravity, like they do in Holland.1 

Agriculture is the 
flying buttress. 

1 Note to Publisher: For Dutch edition, change to “Belgium.” 

45 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

GOOD NEWS 

Religion exists. And so mankind can benefit from its numerous gifts. 

Law: The Ten Commandments are the basis of our entire system of justice. 

Without  them  we  wouldn’t  have  laws,  and  without  laws  there’d  be  chaos.2 

Those  two  tablets  give  you  everything  you  need  to  run  an  orderly  society. 

Lying, stealing, murdering, adultery, idol worship and coveting are out. Parent-

honoring  and  Sabbath  observance  are  in.  By  the  way,  if  you’re  reading  this 

on your religion’s Sabbath, you’d better have a non-believer there turning the 

pages  for  you,  because  when  it  comes  to  the  T.C.s,  I’m  an  originalist.  That 

means,  if  a  neighbor  takes  so  much  as  a  covetous  glimpse  at  my  wife,  I’m 

looking for my lucky stoning hat. 

Morality: Religion lays out clear definitions of good and evil, distinguishing 

good deeds—“solids” in Biblical Hebrew—from sins. Think about it: Without 

this guidance and reward/punishment system, how would we know that it’s 

actually  good  to  give  charity  to  beggars?  Plus,  without  the  concept  of  Right 

and Wrong, we’d have no cowboy movies or cop shows because there’d be no 

I can recommend 
a good page-man. 

It’s made of stone 
(so I blend in). 

Good & Plenty would 
just be Plenty. 

good guys and bad guys—just guys. 

And forget about karaoke. I mean, “(If Loving You Is Wrong) I Don’t Want to 

Be Right” is my go-to crowd pleaser, but who wants to hear “(If Loving You Is 

Okay) Then, Okay”? 

Witch trials make 
great mixers. 

Social Cohesion: Religion gives communities reasons to come together and 

build bonds through shared participation in rituals. Admit it—people would 

never speak to anyone outside their immediate families if not for mandatory 

pilgrimages to holy rocks or watching virgins’ hearts get carved out atop their 

I know what 
a ziggurat is. 

ziggurats. 

Hope:  I  believe  it  was  the  tiger-philosopher  Hobbes  who  described  human 

life as “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.” Religion allows us to ignore 

all that by praying. When we appeal to our deities with a slaughtered ewe, or 

prostration, or, in the case of Hare Krishnas, airport conga line, we exert some 

control over our existence and are filled with hope that God may improve it. 

Otherwise,  we’re  just  chanting  our  deepest  desires  into  a  silent,  indifferent 

void. How depressing would that be? 

46 

2 On the plus side, you wouldn’t get a $100 ticket for parking in front of your own TV studio 
for, like, thirty seconds. C’mon! 

R E L I G I O N  

Meaning:  Life  is  chaotic  and  unpredictable.  If  a  butterfly  flaps  its  wings  in 

one part of the world, it could cause people at the opposite end of the globe 

Moths, get a publicist. 

to  watch  a  Discovery  Channel  special  on  butterflies.  And  what’s  on  next? 

A show about tornadoes. Who made such a harrowing program schedule full 

of seemingly random destruction? It was God’s will. 

Responsibility:  Religion  forces  every  individual  to  take  responsibility. 

Specifically,  take  it  away  from  yourself  and  give  it  to  God.  If  we  had  to  be 

accountable for every one of our actions, we’d be crippled with indecision. But 

with religion pointing the way, we can feel confident in our choice to picket 

our children’s elementary school when we find out the art teacher is gay. 

Hi, Mr. Jellineck! 

Immortality: If you’re good, you don’t “die.” It’s my favorite gift of religion, 

because it’s the most practical. For instance, I got that PBS Civil War series on 

DVDs last Christmas but I haven’t had time to watch. (I can’t wait to see how 

it  turns  out.)  But  thanks  to  religion,  after  I  depart  my  earthly  body  I’ll  have 

eternity to watch those DVDs with Abraham Lincoln. He ought to be able to 

tell me if Ken Burns3 got it right. 

So, now that you understand religion’s gifts, you can understand why America 

chose to be a Godly nation, and by Godly I mean Jesusly. 

RELIGION IN AMERICA 

Make  no  mistake:  America  is  a  Christian  nation.  The  bedrock  of  our  theo-

democracy is our Judeo-Christian Values™. That term, by the way, is a bit of 

a  misnomer.  It  implies  that  Christianity  and  Judaism  are  equal.  That  makes 

about as much sense as comparing Jesus to Moses. One of them could walk on 

water; the other one had to part it. Which one seems more Christian to you? 

Think of “Judeo-Christian” like “Sears, Roebuck & Co.”—Judaism is Roebuck. 

Now, the Secular-Progressives out there are going to say, “Hold on, Colbert. 

Wasn’t  America  founded  on  the  ideas  of  Enlightenment  thinkers  like  Hume 

and Paine?” Common misconception. Who landed at Plymouth Rock? Pilgrims. 

And the only reason they got on the Mayflower was to flee religious persecu-

The “& Co.”? 
Unitarians. 

tion. That means they had a religion: Christianity. And thank God they did. If it 

Thank you, Jesus. 

wasn’t for Jesus’ message of love in their hearts, do you think they would have 

taught the Indians that “maize” is really called “corn”? 

3  Once again, a reporter who failed to interview anybody who was actually there. 

47 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

GUT-CHECK: Since the Pilgrims were victims of persecution, some 

assume they were tolerant. That’s just liberal propaganda. Sure, they were 

against persecution…of Pilgrims. But after they changed their name to 

“Puritans” (in what I believe was a copyright dispute), they were more 

than happy to drown what Lesbians now call Wiccans. 

?????? 

Pat Robertson, tear 
down this wall! 

We hear a lot about how the founders created a so-called “wall of separation 

between  church  and  state.”  The  myth  of  such  a  wall  is  exacerbated  by  our 

Constitution’s confusingly worded First Amendment: 

“Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion…” 

Many  point  to  these  words  as  somehow  prohibiting  the  establishment  of 

Christianity as our national religion. But if the founders were so anti-Christian, 

It’s not “We the 
Ape-People.” 

how come the Constitution never mentions evolution? 

And  even  if  I’m  wrong,  just  because  “Congress  shall  make  no  law”  doesn’t 

mean that we can’t establish a religion. It just means we’ll have to do it without 

Or just a 
knowing wink 

Congress. An executive order, perhaps? 

So, to sum up: America is a Christian nation. And as the old Negro spiritual 

says, “This Train is bound for Glory, this Train.” Folks, America is riding the 

Jesus Train. 

Attention travelers: Please note that the Jesus Train is NOT the Crazy Train 

or the Night Train or the Midnight Train to Georgia. There’s a big difference. 

Check your tickets before boarding. 

48 

R E L I G I O N

JESUS TRAIN TIMETABLE

Jesus Train 

Crazy Train

Night Train

Manger

7-11

L.A. 

Midnight
Train 
to Georgia

Bum-bum! Bum-
bum, bum-bum, 

bum-bum! 
Ay! Ay! Ay!

n Salvation

Off the rails

Oblivion

Georgia

 

i

e Rapture
m
T
e
r
u
t
r
a
p
e
D

i

n
g
i
r
O

o
i
t
a
n
i
t
s
e
D

s
e
i
t
i
n
e
m
a

 
 

d
r
a
o
b
n
O

s
l
a
e
M

Next full moon?

As soon as enough 
change is collected

Midnight

Bliss, eternal life, 
moral certitude

Sleep and/or pee 
anywhere you want

Pips

Bum-bum deedle-
deedle deedle 

buh-duh buh-duh 

buh-duh-buh-duh 

bum-bum

Manna from 

Dove, bat

None (it’s coming 

Roast beef 

Heaven

back up anyway)

sandwich

($11.99?!)

One Other Thing: Just because you’re on a God Train doesn’t mean you’re 

bound  for  Glory.  Only  Our  Lord’s  locomotive  will  carry  us  to  the  winner’s 

circle, but don’t take my word for it. Let our God’s record speak for Itself.

49

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

HOLY WAR. HUH! WHAT IS IT GOOD FOR? ABSOLUTELY EVERYTHING. 

Training and equipping fighting men in the field goes a long way to winning 

any armed conflict. But if you really want to tip the scales in your favor, get 

And have Him bring 
Air Power 

God on your side.4 

A big Salaam 
aleichem to my 
Muslim fans! 

Look no further than the words of Lieutenant General William G. Boykin, U.S. 

Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence, who described our victo-

ries over our terrorist enemy thusly: “I knew my God was bigger than his. I 

knew that my God was a real God and his was an idol.” 

That should be carved into the lead of every bullet fired out of every American 

gun. Too long to fit, though. How about this: 

“My God can beat up your god.” 

Because He can! Take a look. 

THE OFFICIAL WIN-LOSS RECORD OF THE JUDEO-CHRISTIAN GOD 

The War in Heaven (Lucifer’s Rebellion) 

Calculations courtesy 
Pope John XXI 
(c. 1273 AD) 

Lucifer leads 133,306,668 fallen angels against God’s 266,613,336 good angels. 

Not surprisingly, God wins, because God was on God’s side. 

Have they tried 
blowing a trumpet 
in Iraq? 

Joshua blows a trumpet, and the walls of Jericho fall. Later, the sun stands 

still at Gibeon and the moon in the valley of Aijalon so the Israelites can 

defeat the Amorite kings. But maybe the atheists are right—maybe it was all 

God: 1, Not-God: 0. 

Israelites vs. Canaanites 

just a coincidence.5 

God: 2, Not-God: 0. 

The Crusades 

The Crusades lead to the Knights Templar; the Knights Templar lead to the 

Masons; and the Masons lead to the Shriners, a secret society that controls 

world governments, toys with our banking system, and single-handedly keeps 

the fez industry afloat. I’d say God won this round. 

God: 3, Not-God: 0 

50 

4 Or a team of exiled Jewish physicists. Those guys really had a bee in their bonnet about something. 
5 If you believe that, I’ve got some swampland in the Kingdom of Reuben to sell you! 

R E L I G I O N  

The Hundred Years’ War 

With God’s help, King Henry V wins the decisive battle at Agincourt in 1415 

against the idolatrous French, giving the English control of the north and 

Terrible name for a 
war.  Never 
set a date for 
withdrawal. 

west of France. 

God: 4, Not-God: 0. 

The Hundred Years’ War II 

With God’s help, Joan of Arc lifts England’s siege of Orleans, giving the 

French control of the north and west of France. 

God: 5, Not-God: 0. 

The Fall of Constantinople 

When the Muslims took over Constantinople in 1453, it wasn’t because God 

was on the Ottoman Empire’s side. He was just mad at the Byzantines for 

breaking off from the Catholic Church over the addition of the word filioque 

to the Nicene Creed in 1054. Hey guys, “You schism it, you buy it.” Sorry, I’m 

We all scream  
for Nicene! 

still a little bitter. 

God: 6, Not-God: 0. 

Revolutionary War 

God: 7, Not-God: 0. 

The Civil War 

Sorry, Great Britain, but if you go up against “One nation, under God,” you’re 

going to get your ass handed to you twice as hard. (Historico-linguistical note: 

At this point, “God” became synonymous with “America.”) 

Since America was on both sides, whichever way this thing went, everyone 

knew it would be a windfall for the Lord. 

God: 8, Not-God: 0. 

“Brother-against-
brother” is another 
way of “doubling-
down.” 

51 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

World War I 

God wasn’t sure which way to go here—lot of Christians on both sides—so 

He sat it out for fear of tarnishing His perfect record. But then in 1917 

America joined in, so He had no choice. He won it, then retired, making this 

God got forced out of retirement by the taunting of Japanese Shinto spirit 

deities. Germany joined with the Japs (bad move by them), and God killed 

Socialist President Roosevelt so Truman could drop The Bomb.6 

Note: “Jap” is 
an acceptable term 
when used to 
save ink. 

officially The War to End All Wars. 

God: 9, Not-God: 0. 

World War II 

God: 10, Not-God: 0. 

Korean War 

Technically, not a war—a “police action.” Doesn’t count. Although you don’t 

see me writing this book in Korean. So, really... 

God: 11, Not-God: 0. 

You can’t say God lost Vietnam. The Democratic Congress lost it, by refusing 

to fund God’s war. He may be omnipotent, but He’s not made out of money. 

You’re thinking 
of Mammon. 

God: 11, Not-God: 0, Democrats: -1. 

Vietnam 

Iraq 

That’s the last 
time God listens to 
Rumsfeld. 

God: 12, Not-God: 0, Democrats: -1. 

Once again, God won the War. He just doesn’t occupy very well. 

So it’s clear that when you follow God, you’re riding on the winning train,7 but 

if you want to go first class on ChrisTrak, there’s only only one way to ride... 

52 

6 Some may doubt God’s hand here, but do you know what Truman’s job was before being President? 
He sold hats. 
7 Train races! Why isn’t there more of this? We could build parallel tracks, or there could just be time trials. 
We can figure the specifics out later. Get on this, Amtrak! 

R E L I G I O N  

Roman Catholicism! 

Jesus founded only One Church and it wasn’t Unitarian. He took 

His apostle Simon and made him into a rock and built a church on 

Simon says “Pray!” 

him. It’s called “the Holy Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church,” 

or “Church” for short. 

Catholics have many advantages over other Christians. One is marble. For the 

buck I put into the collection plate, I want some production value. That means 

a church, not some community center that doubles as a basketball court. 

Also,  Catholics  have  saints—more  than  10,000  of  them.  They’re  like  God’s 

customer  service  reps,  and  each  of  them  has  a  specialty.  Say  you  lose  your 

wallet. You could bother the Creator to help you find it, but if you’re a Catholic, 

you don’t have to. Just pray to St. Anthony. Finding lost things is all he does. 

For Eternity. Also, there are times when you might want to pray to St. Agatha. 

She’s the patron saint of nursing and bell-making. If you’re both a nurse and a 

bell-maker, that’s one-stop shopping. 

Some are put off by the labyrinthine structure of Catholic dogma, but many 

of its rituals are quite beautiful, and not just when edited together as a tense, 

poetic counterpoint to brutal violence in Mafia films. 

But maybe you’re not ready to be a Roman Catholic. Well, as the saying goes, 

“There are many roads to God.” Some are just more twisty than others. So if 

you want to get a little needless exercise, why don’t you try one of these Goat 

Paths to Nowhere? 

Protestantism 

This is a variant form of Christianity, or “heresy.” 

Protestants don’t make me angry as much as disappointed. Unlike 

the world’s crazy made-up religions, they’re so close to getting it 

But they do make 
me angry. 

right. They’re a single Pope away from reaching their full potential.8 

But instead of stepping up and making a commitment to one, holy, apostolic 

Church, they’re stuck on this notion of “independence,” of unmediated faith 

in  Christ.  Do  you  really  think  God  prefers  a  mess  of  polyglot,  disorganized 

prayers  over  the  elegant  hand-written  Latin  epistles  from  Benedict  XVI?  As 

8 I’m sure the Pope would put on a polo shirt and boat shoes, if that would make you feel more comfortable. 

53 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

if He doesn’t have enough to do already without putting your request for an 

aboveground pool into Babel Fish. 

Where I come from,  
nailing things to  
a church door is  
vandalism. 

So we get it, Protestants. You’ve had your 490-year “protest”—let’s move on. 

Martin Luther was probably right to translate the Bible into German, and I’ll 

grant that he may have had a legitimate beef about selling indulgences. But 

let’s  stop  living  in  the  past.  Whenever  you’re  ready,  the  Church’s  doors  are 

always open. We’ll let you back into eternal salvation, and all you have to do 

is say a few Hail Marys, feel a little guilty, and deliver us your massive army of 

lockstep values voters. 

Plus, if you come back into the fold, I’ve got some bargain-basement relics you 

might be interested in. I’m talking rare, primo St. Ebrulf shinbone. 

It blows. 

That’s my general take on Protestantism. Here’s the blow-by-blow: 

Episcopal Church 

Why don’t Episcopalians just come out and say it: They’re 

Anglicans. A bunch of Tory Loyalist Brit-o-philes living in our 

midst, just waiting for the day America lets her guard down so they 

can slip tea into our coffeemakers, bayonet our bald eagles, and 

reinstate Henry VIII. Let’s keep an eye on these people. 

Don’t be a  
Meth-head. 

What, the Church of England wasn’t heretical enough for you? 

Methodism 

Presbyterians 

“Forgive us our debts?” 
Who are they, Bono? 

Presbyterians are identical to Methodists except that one of them 

says “debts” instead of “trespasses” in the Lord’s Prayer. Hundreds 

of years of bitter armed conflict has failed to resolve this differ-

ence. How many more lives must be lost? 

Baptists 

I’m a pious guy, but even I have my limits. I draw the line right 

around spending 8 hours in church every Sunday. Church should 

be a solemn 45 minutes to sit quietly and feel guilty, with donuts at 

54 

R E L I G I O N  

the end to make you feel better. I don’t go in for a full day of singing 

and dancing and rejoicing, no matter how nice the hats are. I prefer 

my Gospel monotonously droned to me from a pulpit, thank you 

very much. 

Quakers9 

Nixon. 

These folks produced only two things I like—Oatmeal and Richard 

Actually the rice cakes 
aren’t bad either. 

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints 

(Mormonism) 

To their credit, Mormonism’s founders did something that other 

self-proclaimed prophets throughout history never thought of: They 

lived in America. I’ll admit it even makes me a bit uncomfortable to 

think that my doctrine was established somewhere as unseemly as 

the Middle East. 

The Church was founded after prophet Joseph Smith left a lucra-

tive career divining for treasure to find the golden plates containing 

the Book of Mormon, which describes a visit by Jesus to America 

after He left Jerusalem. Evidently He was ascending to Heaven, got 

just above the clouds, and took a hard left. 

On the plus side, any guy who’s ever agonized over “boxers or briefs” 

before a hot date should consider Mormonism.10 They have special 

underwear, so that decision is made for you. Plus, pre-marital sex 

is prohibited. Casual sex is really not a problem at all to these guys, 

even after you’re married. The Church wants you to have 11 kids, so 

sex is never going to be casual. It is going to be work. 

And I’ll give the Mormons this: They know which way the wind 

blows. When America decided that polygamy wasn’t the way to go, 

the Mormons changed their ways and banned it. They had similar 

changes in policy when public opinion turned against the traditions 

9  Any religion that calls itself “Friends” comes across as a little desperate. 
10  I recommend a thong.  Nothing turns the ladies off more than a visible jockey-line. 

55 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

of massacring pioneers and believing that all Black people are evil. 

Pretty much whenever the general populace decides that Mormons 

are a sinful crazy cult, their leader receives a message straight from 

God that makes everything OK. This practice continues to this 

day; you can see it in the way that Mitt Romney was pro-choice 

when he was running for governor of Massachusetts, but was 

divinely inspired to become pro-life when he was running for the 

Republican nomination for president. 

On the minus side, you could be ex-communicated by Donny 

Osmond. 

Judaism 

Now, I have nothing but respect for the Jewish people. Since the 

Bible is 100% the true Word of God, and the Jews believe in the 

Old Testament,11 that means Judaism is 50% right. 

My biggest problem with Judaism is its tradition of literary criticism. Its highest 

ideal is to sit around studying day and night. I can’t trust any religion with that 

kind of book-fetish. As much as I love the Bible, even I can only read so much 

in one bathroom sitting. Let alone the Talmud. Seriously, Rashi, every tractate 

needs a commentary? It wouldn’t hurt to take a seltzer break once in a while. 

Also, there’s this whole notion of “Jewish Guilt.” Hmm, sounds familiar. Maybe 

because it was originally called “Catholic Guilt”! Quit trying to steal our spot as 

guiltiest religion, Jews. If your mother knew about this blatant theft, it would 

kill her—kill her. 

They don’t even need the guilt. They’ve got plenty of other ways to make them-

selves miserable. Just look at their holidays. The most important one involves 

spending a day not eating and thinking about all the bad things they’ve done. 

You get the day off from work, and you spend it moping. Count me out! 

Look, guys, you need to lighten up. I’ve been to Jewish weddings—I know you 

can cut loose when you want to. That thing with the chair is crazy. Let’s bring 

around a little more of that. 

56 

11 Which the Jews call Matzo. 

Commenting in the 
margins of books is 
stupid. 

R E L I G I O N  

Also,  if  you  could  concentrate  on  rebuilding  that  Temple  and  bringing  forth 

our Armageddon/Second Coming, we’d really appreciate it. 

With their common devotion to the Word of God as revealed in the Old and 

New Testaments, the Christians and the Jews share a common heritage.12 

The Rapture is the 
only way you’re 
getting rid of us. 

Together these Testaments are known as: 

It’s  a  big  book  with  big  words  like  Abednego.  It’s  also  often  misinterpreted. 

THE BIBLE 

Here’s all you need to know. 

THE OLD TESTAMENT 

After Jesus showed up, the Old Testament basically became a way for Bible 

publishers to keep their word count up. 

Of course, just because Jesus replaces the Old Testament doesn’t mean you 

should necessarily skip it. That would be like skipping Batman & Robin just 

because the story starts over in Batman Begins.13 The important thing to realize 

is that both the old and the new stories are about an all-powerful being trying 

to rid the world of evildoers, only in the new one The Batman can eat pork. 

Bat-chops! 

But  in  case  you  don’t  have  time  to  consult  the  Old  Testament,  I’ve  taken 

the  liberty  of  summing  up  the  highlights  below.  This  isn’t  supposed  to  be  a 

replacement for the Old Testament, but if you want to save some shelf-space 

by tearing it out of the Bible and replacing it with this book, I’m sure God will 

understand. 

marriage.” 

THE CONCENTRATED OLD TESTAMENT14 

Creation:  “In  the  beginning,  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth.”  Sorry, 

Darwin-huggers,  but  it’s  not  “In  the  beginning,  a  monkey  evolutioned  gay 

Fine with God. 

Adam and Eve/ The Fall of Man: Mankind is inherently sinful. Also inher-

ently trusting of women and snakes. Fight these instincts! 

12 Except for the Jews. 
13 Starring Christian Bale, directed by Christopher Nolan. Coincidence? 
14 Just add Jesus. 

57 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Cain and Abel: Are you your brother’s keeper? Yes, but that doesn’t mean he 

can live in your guest room forever. Get a job, Allen! 

Dew-ing it 

Noah and the Flood: All weather is sin-related. Lust causes thunder, anger 

causes fog, and you don’t want to know what causes dew. 

Sodom and Gomorrah: If you wonder what God thinks about sodomy, just 

ask a Sodomite. Oh, that’s right—you can’t, because God destroyed them all 

with fire and brimstone. 

was a close second. 

on some pants! 

The  10  Commandments:  Moses’  greatest  achievement,  though  that  beard 

David and Goliath: Size doesn’t matter, but temperature does. Come on, put 

King David and his 
“slingshot” 

Book of Job: Bad things happen to good people. Suck it up. 

Jonah swallowed by a whale: If you don’t run away from your responsibili-

ties and you never tell a lie, one day you’ll become a real boy. 

Samson and Delilah: Don’t let your girlfriend cut your hair! 

THE NEW TESTAMENT 

Spoiler Alert! Jesus is the salvation of all mankind. 

OTHER HEATHENS 

Shinto 

Shinto is a Japanese religion based on the worship of kami, or 

spirits,  which  inhabit  everything.  So  any  object  or  concept  you 

want to pray to, you can. Sometimes the kami are even stacked up 

double: For example, each tree has a kami in it, but then there’s 

Provided none are 
illegal immigrant 
spirits 

another kami for all trees. So, first strike against this bull-Shint? It’s inefficient. 

I could probably run that religion with half its current spirit workforce. And 

those savings would get passed directly to the believer. 

Plus, a whole bunch of magical beings based in different parts of nature? That’s 

not  a  religion,  that’s  Pokemon.  Which  shows  how  Shinto  hooks  you—once 

you’ve prayed to a few spirits, you’ve “gotta catch ’em all!” 

58 

R E L I G I O N  

Hinduism 

I’m torn on Hinduism. On the one hand, they believe in karma 

and reincarnation, where good things happen to people who do 

good deeds and bad things happen to people who do bad deeds. 

Then after you die, they take a look at your karma account and 

you come back as something better or worse, depending on how 

you did. I like this philosophy, because it means if you’re good enough in this 

life, you can be reincarnated as a Catholic. And if this stuff is true, I was one 

amazing Hindu in my last life. And given the amount of good I’m doing now, it’s 

A god, or whatever 

Next Stop: Nirvanaville for me. 

Also, Hindu gods make fantastic stuffed animals. They’ve got us there. When 

it  comes  to  merchandising,  the  Catholic  Church  doesn’t  have  anything  to 

compete with a blue elephant head.15 

But there’s plenty to be worried about. First off, they got us in the numbers 

game. There are how many people in India who worship how many gods with 

how many arms? Multiply all that together, and the results are truly terrifying. 

What worries me more is their injunction against beef. There’s nothing more 

Worst beanie 
baby ever. 

mouth-watering than a strong, healthy bovine in the artificial-hormone-induced 

prime of life. So what if it could be my great-grandfather reincarnated? I’d be 

honored to pass through the colon of my descendants. Give me a break. 

Buddhism 

Another go-figure religion. “Hey, why don’t we all put on robes 

and  sit  in  a  rock  garden  and  just,  like,  be  aware?”  Exactly. 

That’s the easiest rhetorical question I’ve ever asked. Buddhism 

instructs its followers to forsake attachment to material things. 

Hey, Buddhists— 
this book is a thing. 

Go for it, guys. That’s just more material things for those of us who have enough 

sense to glorify our Lord with speedboats. 

And  frankly,  I’m  offended  by  this  idea  of  the  so-called  “middle  way,”  the 

Buddhist doctrine of avoiding extremes. What’s the point of religion without 

extremes? You’re either a believer who’s guaranteed a seat at God’s right hand 

in the Kingdom of Heaven or an infidel condemned to boil eternally in a lake of 

Buddhists hate 
Mountain Dew! 

searing excrement. We’re at Holy War; pick a side, tubby. 

15 The Hindus have an elephant-headed god Ganesha, and I’ll grant it’s hard not to worship a deity that can 

59 

eat hay without using its fingers. 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Islam16 

Scientology 

Islam is a great and true religion revealed in the Holy Koran which 

was dictated by the angel Gabriel to the final prophet Mohammed, 

Blessing and Peace Be Upon Him. 

This  fast-growing  but  controversial  religion  is  attracting  some 

smart people. At least they seem smart—they certainly know a lot 

about Scientology! 

I  know  a  lot  of  folks  are  quick  to  criticize  Scientology  for  its 

secrecy and willingness to sue dissenters, but if you figured out the secret to 

expunging Engrams from the Reactive Mind, you’d be protective of it, too. 

Though  I  may  disagree  with  Scientology  on  a  number  of  things—like  the 

notion that Galactic Lord Xenu exiled Thetans to Earth in spaceships shaped 

exactly like late 60s-era DC-8 airplanes, and then stacked them around volca-

noes and blew them up with hydrogen bombs 75 million years ago, and the 

spirits of these Thetans now inhabit our human bodies and prevent us from 

Glib 

reaching our full potential—I do agree with their well-publicized disdain for

psychoanalysis. Three hundred bucks an hour and all the guy wants to do is 

talk about my mother? Beam me up, L. Ron! 

Rastafarianism 

Any  religion  that  sees  20th  century  Ethiopian  emperor 

Haile Selassie17 as a member of the Holy Trinity is worth our 

suspicion. Then again, any religion whose messiah’s name 

isn’t  recognized  by  Microsoft  Word  can’t  be  that  much  of 

a threat. My main beef with these folks is that they try to 

make smoking grass acceptable by labeling it a “sacrament.” In my book, that 

gets you Raptured right into federal prison camp. 

Still, Reggae is pretty good. Makes great background music at the corporate 

No potato salad, 
no cry 

barbecue. 

60 

16 Islam is a great and true religion revealed in the Holy Koran which was dictated by the angel Gabriel to the 

final prophet Mohammed, Blessing and Peace Be Upon Him. 
17 Member of the Holy Trinity and he couldn’t even beat Italy? 

R E L I G I O N  

All Other Crazy Cults 

The  problem  with  cults  is  that  they  don’t  have  the  brass  to  be 

honest  from  the  get-go.  They  hide  behind  phrases  like  “self-

improvement workshop” or “human potential coach” or “improv 

class,” then they slowly sneak in the crazy stuff so that you don’t 

notice. If they had any guts, in the very first cult meeting they’d say, “You all 

need to wear yellow bedsheets and have sex with me twice a day until we get 

beamed up to a comet in twelve years. Also, give me all your money.”18 Then 

we wouldn’t have a problem—the wacky people can still join, and the people 

Buy I Am America, 
the audio-book. 

who are just suggestible can go, “Oh, this is a cult” and get out of there. I’m not 

trying to take away anyone’s right to get poisoned in order to send their spirit 

to Pluto, I’m just saying they should know what they’re getting ahead of time. 

Here’s an easy way to figure out if you’re in a cult: If you’re wondering whether 

you’re in a cult, the answer is yes. 

Atheists 

These  No-goodnik  no-Godniks  are  growing  in  numbers  and 

power in America. It makes me wonder how a God could exist 

Who’d allow people to piss me off so much. 

Luckily, a recent survey published in the American Sociological 

Review  revealed  that  atheists  are  the  least  trusted  group  in 

America—less  trusted,  even,  than  homosexuals.  It  makes 

“Dust in the Wind” is 
not a hymn. 

sense—at least we trust the homosexuals with our hair. 

But here’s the biggest head-scratcher of all: Not only are atheists destroying 

our country, they’re completely deluding themselves. There’s simply no way to 

prove that there is no God. If I didn’t hate them so much, I’d feel bad for these 

folks. Imagine going through life completely duped into thinking that there’s 

no invisible, omniscient higher power guiding every action on Earth. It’s just so 

arbitrary! Can’t they see? 

What’s worse is that atheists blindly follow whatever their scientists tell them 

to,  no  matter  how  unbelievably  fantastical  it  sounds  to  rational  ears.  Yeah, 

earthquakes  are  caused  by  the  shifting  of  giant  unseen  plates  buried  deep 

beneath the ground. There’s no way it could be God jiggling the globe because 

18 The Colbert Empowerment System is different. It’s not a cult, it’s a Mind Management System™ that 

61 

removes “the unwanted cash that’s holding you back.” 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

people in California commit sodomy. No, that would be too simple! 

Atheists enrage me precisely because they impute everything that happens to 

the semi-random workings of the natural world. They refuse to take respon-

sibility  for  their  actions!  If  their  dog  dies,  it’s  because  the  decay  of  its  cells 

caused by the aging process was “meant to be.” They’ll never stand up and say, 

“I deserved this as punishment for mixing my meats and cheeses.” Makes me 

angry just thinking about it. 

Agnostics 

Atheists without balls. 

ATHEISTS AND THE BIG SECULAR AGENDA 

People of faith like you and me are under attack. Especially people like me. 

Atheists are the driving force behind what I call Big Secularism. 

Card-carrying members of BS have snaked their way into every branch of our 

federal government, except for the judicial and executive. Did you know that 

in the House of Representatives and the Senate, there are as many as one self-

described atheist currently serving? Democratic Representative Pete Stark of 

California’s 13th district, to name just one. Just think of it—how are any pro-

faith initiatives going to make it into law when Congress is held hostage by the 

anti-God caucus of Stark, his self and him? 

BS  is  a  gathering  storm—a  growing  movement  of  lefty  Lord-loathers  intent 

on driving religion out of the public square, no matter how much time I spend 

hanging tinsel. 

THE WAR ON CHRISTMAS 

I’m  not  afraid  to  say  it:  I  love  Christmas.15  Call  me  crazy,  but  I  like  getting 

together with the family, having a nice meal and opening presents. I even like 

eating candy out of a sock. I wish there were more days designated to do that. 

Sorry if that offends some of you, but I promised I was going to tell it like it is. 

How about 
Thanksgiving dinner 
out of a sock? 

And I’m what you call a Christmas Guy. 

62 

15 However, I can’t say I love Easter. Pastel colors wash me out. 

R E L I G I O N  

That’s why it upset me so much when the town hall in the coastal Connecticut 

hamlet where I vacation was forced to take down its nativity scene. And this 

is  despite  the  fact  that  it  also  displayed  a  sign  telling  people  they  could  see 

a  menorah  two  towns  over.  But  balance  isn’t  what  the  wall-of-separation-

between-church-and-state-huggers  are  after.  They  just  want  to  marginalize 

people of faith of all kinds and push us into the corners of American Life. So, 

down  the  display  came.  It’s  easy  to  imagine  this  sort  of  thing  is  happening 

everywhere. Where will it end? 

A Visit from St. Secular 

’Twas the night before Christmas, and all through the house 
Not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse; 
Mamma in her kerchief, and I in the nude, 
Were shocked that our holiday had been misconstrued, 
When out on the lawn there arose such a clatter, 
I sprang from the bed to see what was the matter. 
(Mind you, I’m still nude.) 
Out to the lawn in my glory, I flew. 
To see my manger disassembled by the ACLU. 
–Written by Clement C. Moore, 1822 

–Updated by Stephen Colbert, 2007 

Still nude 

Imagine a time in the not-too-distant future—December 24th, but instead of 

festive  lights  and  glowing  Santas,  the  streets  are  illuminated  by  police  heli-

copters. Meanwhile, in the streets, roving gangs of children terrorize the city. 

They  have  zero  respect  for  authority  because  whether  a  child  is  naughty  or 

nice, everyone gets the same thing for Christmas: Jack Squat. So they’ve gone 

wild.  It’s  like  Devil’s  Night  in  Detroit,  only  there’s  still  stuff  worth  burning. 

As the fires rage, bands of depressed alcoholic derelicts, once jolly carolers, 

shuffle aimlessly, no longer sharing their cheerful seasonal hymns, but instead 

searching  for  a  death  that  will  never  come.  God  rest  ye,  merry  Gentlemen. 

And of course, now that there’s no Christmas, insects have grown to enormous 

63 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

size. So everyone has to dodge the ants and beetles that are crushing buses in 

their powerful mandibles. 

The correct answer: 
no 

Does my vision of a world without Christmas sound far-fetched? This is exactly 

the future the Secul-azis want for your children and grandchildren. 

Jesus hasn’t 
forgiven you for that 
Cross, trees. 

EVOLUTION IS REAL! 

Big  Secularism’s  plan  is  to  keep  eroding  our  holiday.  Little  by  little,  they’re 

taking away a manger here, a “Come All Ye Faithful” there, until pretty soon 

there’s  nothing  left.  That’s  why  we’ve  got  to  dig  in  our  heels  and  celebrate 

the holiday bigger than ever. If you usually get one tree, this year get two. If 

you usually do two, have five. The BSists need to understand that there is no 

number of trees we are unwilling to cut down to prove our point. 

You heard me! Y’see, there’s nothing I like more than using the Big Secularism 

against itself. 

purpose: 

You  say  Man  evolved?  Well,  Man  was  made  in  God’s  image,  so  God  must 

have evolved too. I adapted your precious “Ascent of Man” chart to a higher 

How  does  it  feel  now,  Secularists?  You  can’t  possibly  argue  with  this— 

because it’s your theory. Based on this chart, Jesus clearly adapted over time 

to take on attributes that would help Him send you to Hell. In your monkey-

evolved faces! 

64 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  FO R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

I think it’s wonderful that Stephen has written such a 

considerate chapter on Me. Hopefully these pages will decrease 

the number of skeptics out there, though I understand why 

some people are atheists and agnostics. It’s not going to spare 

them the Eternal torment of Hell, but I understand. Hey, my 

fault for giving you all Free Will. 

I could convince everybody that I exist by stepping up the 

Divine Interventions, but there are only so many hours in the 

God 
Maker of All that Is 
Seen and Unseen 

day, you know? 

This gets to the main question that everyone usually asks Me: 

If I’m so all-powerful, why don’t I answer everyone’s prayers? 

The answer: I used to. 

Back in the day, fewer people prayed for me to do things for them. There was a lot 

more thanksgiving, and it’s less time-consuming to answer prayers that are praising 

you for things. Those were the good old days. Now it’s gimme, gimme, gimme. 

It especially shows up in sports. Used to be, you never had both sides pray for 

victory. One team max, and 9 times out of 10 that team was Notre Dame. Now, you’re 

guaranteed to have counteracting prayers. What am I supposed to do? For Me, it’s liter-

ally a no-win situation. I usually have no choice but to answer the prayer of whichever 

team is better. 

practiced more. 

Of course, I can’t get caught playing favorites. So if I do help a team, it’s not going to 

be with something cool and dramatic like a line drive that suddenly lifts up and carries 

over the fence. Instead, I usually just go back in time and make the winning team have 

I mean, if there’s one team that is clearly more righteous, yes, I’ll help that team, 

although sometimes I’ll help the team of sinners instead because I love a good 

underdog. Plus that nudge might set them on the righteous path, or there could be a 

sick kid, or there’s some other factor... you know what? It’s complicated. You’d really 

have to be Everywhere. 

exceptions. 

Oh, and let me say this—if I have money on a game, I never help either team. No 

So, in regular life, why do I answer some prayers and not other prayers? Pretty 

much the same reasoning as sports. Do I return the runaway to her family, or do I get 

that guy his dream job? (Yes, I do pair up all prayers.) 

It’s not totally random. I have a system, although I can’t really explain it in a way 

that will make sense to someone without Ultimate Knowledge. Put it this way: If I’ve 

helped you find your car keys 20 times, don’t bother calling Me when you get a tumor. 

You guys in the USA don’t know how good you have it. Your nation is crazy blessed 

already. When the Dow breaks 14,000—that’s a mudslide in Guatemala. So, you know, 

try to keep it in perspective. 

so don’t waste your breath. 

And by the way, I always have money on the Super Bowl and the Kentucky Derby, 

FUN 

ZONE 

Religious conversion is a rigorous, demanding process designed to test your 

resolve and dedication to the new faith you’ve chosen. Or you could just use 

my Religion Randomizer

! Because let’s face it, if it ain’t 

Christianity, 

it’s just Path-to-Hell Lotto! 

Your new religion is... 

? 

????? 

CONVERT 

Go to 

www.colbertnation.com 

and click on the Religionizer button 

to pick your spiritual poison. 

Part Two 

MY AMERICAN ADOLESCENCE 

I was thirteen when we moved from the dirt road where I grew up to the big 
city of Charleston, where the rich kids lived—kids whose families had been 
there since it had been Charles Towne or, even earlier, Chuck Mound. 

My new school gave me an opportunity I never had before—getting beaten 
up every day. On those rare days when I was not beaten, the next morning I’d 
find a note in my locker: “Sorry we forgot to beat you yesterday. We’ll beat you 
twice as hard today.” No one can touch Southerners for manners. 

The daily beatings lost some of their intensity during the football season, 
when  my  jock  tormentors  were  able  to  split  their  latent  Homosexual  Rage 
between my torso and their locker-room hijinks. This lull allowed my swelling 
to go down, and it turned out I had facial features. The girls noticed. Soon I was 
a regular on the debutante circuit where I tried scoring a few “touchdowns” of 
my own. The beatings began again. Some of those debs were pretty tough. 

When I left for college, I was determined never to be a victim again. I would 
take my lead from the Hollywood tough guys I had always looked up to: Charles 
Bronson, Clint Eastwood, Ned Beatty. So on Day One of my freshman year at 
Dartmouth, I walked into class and punched the first person I saw—my Ethics 
professor,  Dr.  Buneta.  Judging  by  the  grade  he  gave  me,  holding  a  grudge 
passes for “ethical” in the Ivy League. I don’t know what the big deal was. That 
beard had to absorb some of the impact. 

I include this coming-of-age tale because it encompasses the five big Ss of 

Adolescence: 

School, Sports, Sex, Sodomy, and the Silver Screen. 
Trust me, they’re all in there. 

69 

fig 7. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C H APT ER  5  

S P O RT S 

“No time for losers, ’cause we are the Champions...of the World”
 –Freddy Mercury, Glam Rock God and sports queen 

NOW, 

GENERALLY  SPEAKING,  I’M  NOT  A 

BIG  FAN  OF  SPORTS.  IT’S  A  WASTE 

OF  BOTH  TESTOSTERONE  AND 

BLIND, FERVENT ALLEGIANCE, BOTH 

OF WHICH WOULD BE BETTER DIRECTED TOWARDS OUR 

MILITARY. BUT THERE IS NO QUESTION THAT SPORTS IS 

A HUGE PART OF OUR CULTURE THESE DAYS. THERE  ARE 

dozens  of  TV  channels  devoted  exclusively  to  sports—channels  you  can’t 

remove from your cable package and stop paying for, even if you make it clear 

that’s what you want.  

Respond to my 
letters, Comcast! 

So, if I’m no cheerleader of sports, why write a chapter about it? Sports do 

have some positive impact on society. They solve problems, such as how to get 

inner-city kids to spend $175 on shoes. They serve as a backdrop for some of 

our most memorable commercials. And they remain the one and only relevant 

application of math. Not only that, but we have sports to thank for most of 

the last century’s advances in manliness. The system starts in school, where 

gym class separates the men from the boys. Then those men are taught to be 

winners, or at least, losers that hate themselves. 

Nothing puts hair on 
your chest like shame. 

71 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

ALSO: another great aspect of sports is the chance to share experience with 

the common man. To see the roar of the crowd from your soundproof skybox, 

tossing  down  the  vintage  port  and  veal  medallions,  then  rubbing  elbows  at 

the post-game locker room party with all your favorite athletes—it’s a classic 

Shaq, I must get 
that recipe for 
Key Lime Pie! 

American experience. 

Speaking of stadiums, I’ve followed the lead of the team owners and sold the 

naming rights of this chapter to the highest bidder. So from here on out, this 

chapter will be known as the... 

CHEVRO N: 
“The Gas with Techron” 
SPORTS CHAPTER 

Visit our Sponsor! 

So whether I like it or not, sports are here to stay. And if they’re going to exist, I 

should give them a chapter. Like I always say: if you’re not going to listen to me 

and not do something anyway, at least listen to me and do it right. 

WAKE UP CALL: Sorry there, handball, but you’re just tennis for poor people. 

HISTORY LESSON 

Modern  “sports”  as  we  know  them  originated  in  ancient  Rome,1  when  civic 

officials realized that it would be much easier to get contestants for their gladi-

ator contests if the loser was not killed. Once everyone realized that a live loser 

could be humiliated for much longer than a dead one, the idea caught on. 

Back then, a sport was only what could be achieved with the human body— 

how fast can you run, how far can you throw, how big a thing can you lift, or 

push, or kill. But the ideal of sports as an exhibition of human accomplishment 

ended in 1893 when they started using football helmets. In my book, drawing 

the impact away from your skull defeats the entire purpose of hitting some-

It’s concussion, 
not con-cushion. 
Toughen up! 

thing with your head.

72 

1 Some Ivy Leaguers claim that sports, in fact, originated in Ancient Greece.  But athletes back then were nude 
men covered in oil, which means that the Ancient Greek sports were pretty gay, and therefore, not sports “as 
we know them.”  There are no gays in modern sports, with the one exception being all of women’s sports. 

C H E V R O N   “ T H E   G A S   W I T H   T E C H R O N ”   S P O R T S   C H A P T E R  

RULES OF THE GAME: Sports contain a lot of rules, and I’m not a fan of 

“rules,” especially when it comes to sports. That’s just Big Government 

interference. Let the free market decide what constitutes a touchdown. 

Chevron, sponsoring this 
chapter was a home run! 

SPORTS IN THE NEW MILLENNIUM 

The big story in sports right now is athletes taking drugs, making themselves 

better with steroids and human growth hormone. Some people have a problem 

with this, but not me. 

NEWS FLASH: Athletes perform for our enjoyment. So “performance-

enhancing drugs” are really “enjoyment-enhancing drugs.” 

Bravo, Mr. Bonds. 

Also no going back 
post-Black. 

The  fact  is,  Americans  want  the  best  of  everything.  That’s  why  Americans 

won’t watch women’s basketball. Every time I see a lady make a shot I think, “I 

bet a guy could’ve made that better.” “Enhanced” athletics are the same way. 

Back  in  the  day  when  sports  consisted  of  little  slow  guys  hitting  set  shots, 

bunting, and staging Statue of Liberty plays, the public was satisfied because 

they didn’t know any better. But now that we’ve seen huge behemoths with 

2% body fat and misshapen foreheads leap over piles of bodies to crush each 

other’s larynx, we can’t go back. That’s why I’m proposing the end of all regula-

tions on what athletes do to themselves. If a guy wants to shoot himself up 

with hormones or chimp sperm, that’s his business. The only thing that matters 

is performance on the field. Now a lot of people ask, “What kind of message 

would this send to our young people?” To which I reply, “Don’t suck. Go the 

extra mile to actually be good or you’ll be selling insurance.” With those forces 

at work in the marketplace of modern scientific body modification, our sports 

will continue to be the most entertaining in the world. 

TRASH TALK 

Sometimes the best performance-enhancing drugs come from the mind. This 

might  come  in  handy  when  there  aren’t  any  regular  performance-enhancing 

drugs around, or maybe you have them but there’s no time to inject. Like when 

you’re  in  that  five-on-five  company  league  hoops  game  covering  the  sweaty 

73 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

guy with the mustache and knee brace—let’s call him Carl 2 —and he’s driving 

toward  the  basket  and  your  only  options  are  A)  to  plant  a  shoulder  in  his 

meaty flank or B) let him score. That’s when it’s time to let loose with option 

C) a little trash-talk. 

Try this: 

“Hey Carl, what’s your favorite system of geologically significant caverns? 

Mine is ‘Carlsbad’... at basketball!” 

Did I need to hit him that hard? Maybe not, but in the heat of after-work coed 

basketball, you don’t always have time to perceive your opponent as a human. 

Healthy  trash-talk  is  a  vital  pillar  of  the  Temple  of  Sport,  and  as  with  the 

Acropolis its erosion portends the downfall of our civilization. 

“Hey, let’s give everyone a trophy, even the kid who never gets put in the game 

and seems to enjoy himself anyway.”  That’s what Coach PC Police says. 

Well, I’ve got a trophy for that kid, and it’s a big bronze boot to commemorate 

his being kicked out of the league. I don’t want my son thinking that medioc-

rity is an option—“Success or Exposure,” that’s the Colbert motto. We need 

to  teach  our  children  that  their  peers  are  competitors  for  food,  shelter,  and 

eventually mates. And I know I’m not going to win any awards for saying that, 

probably because these days all the awards have already been given out for 

Even during the 
work day, it’s hard 
to perceive Carl 
as a human. 

I’m sure Carl would 
say the same thing. 

We must stop Carl 
from mating. 

“Good Effort.” 

The scene: Weehawken, New Jersey. A duel between Alexander Hamilton 

and Aaron Burr. As Hamilton loads his dueling pistol, Burr tells him only 

fools and mountebanks will use the ten-dollar bill. Hamilton takes umbrage 

and begins to tell Burr that firstly the ten-dollar bill does not yet exist, and 

furthermore only dead people can legally appear on U.S. curren…BANG! 

Welcome to my wallet, Al. 

74 

2 Names have not been changed. If Carl can’t handle it maybe he should find another church basement to 
dribble in. No one drives my lane without paying a toll. 

C H E V R O N   “ T H E   G A S   W I T H   T E C H R O N ”   S P O R T S   C H A P T E R  

My favorite places to trash-talk are professional sporting events. Sure, there’s 

no way I could perform at the same level as a professional athlete. But just 

because I can’t beat LeBron James in a dunking contest doesn’t mean I can’t 

try and lure him into the stands for a fistfight by pointing out that his trade-

mark headband makes him look like the ringleader of a 1980s exercise video. 

SOME PEOPLE are going to say trash-talk is the last refuge of the desperate. 

You can see these people coming a mile away, in their tweed coats with the 

Morning  Edition

  Travel  Mugs.  To  them  I  say,  “Since  when  did  the  spirit  of 

competition become some kind of wet nurse for the weak?” Pointing out an 

adversary’s flaws is a tradition as old as wife-stealing. So, when sporting, never 

hesitate to dish out heaping servings of hearty smack-pie. 

THE SPORTS BREAKDOWN 

With the overabundance of sports out there, how do you know which ones to 

watch? Easy, I’m going to tell you. There are some sports that deserve your 

respect and adoration and others that should be ignored—I’m looking at you, 

Soccer. First, let’s go over the sports you should be recording nightly on your 

home Digital Video Recorder. 

3 

BASEBALL: Baseball is as American as apple pie. In fact, I’ve often thought 

the game should be played with an apple instead of a ball. I have a lot of other 

great ideas! 

There’s a reason that baseball is the National Pastime, and it’s not just because 

it  is  our  most  popular  sport,  after  football,  basketball,  and  NASCAR  racing. 

It is that the simple joy of hitting something with a stick is one that speaks to 

every American child, regardless of race, class, or upbringing. Wherever there 

are  sticks,  or  long  pieces  of  processed  wood,  you  can  find  children  hitting 

something with them. As the child grows, so does the challenge—can you hit 

something that doesn’t want to be hit? And thus begins the child’s lifetime love 

of baseball. Unfortunately, the integrity of the sport has been sullied by our 

sex-crazed  culture.  I’ve  heard  from  a  worldly  4th  grader  that  “rounding  the 

bases” is a euphemism for “going all the way” with a girl. Why don’t you youths 

try rounding the abstinence bases instead? 

3 If  you wanted me to use your brand name, TiVo, you should have sprung for the sponsorship. 
I’ll say it again, no free rides. 

75 

The Blessed  
Smackrament. 

For more on my baseball-pie 
musings, read my book: 
“Hey Batter, Batter, Batter. 
Eat Batter.” 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

7th INNING STRETCH:

 “Buy me some peanuts and cracker jacks...” Hey, 

buy them yourself! Just more melodic proof that we are living in a welfare 

state. 

Baseball reflects the American dream in many other ways. Baseball players 

are very well paid, and they get to stand around in a park most of the time. 

Once in a while, a ball comes their way, but the rest of the game can be spent 

scanning the crowd for hot girls. When their team comes up to bat, baseball 

players  are  considered  incredibly  skilled  if  they  can  do  their  job  35%  of  the 

time. In almost all other American professions, workers are expected to get 

that number up to at least 45% or they’d be fired. 

TIME OUT: Bull Durham is the best Kevin Costner baseball movie. After 

that comes Field of Dreams, then For the Love of the Game, and then 

Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves. 

76 

B L O C K B U S T E R   “ N O W   Y O U   D O N ’ T   H A  V E   T O   C H O O S E ”   S P O R T S   C H A P T E R  

I should add, I do most of my sport-related Kevin Costner research at my local 

Blockbuster. Why do I tell you this? 

BECAUSE:  Blockbuster  just  bought  out  the  sponsorship  rights  for  this 

chapter from Chevron. It’s now called the 

B L O C K B U S T E R  
“Now You Don’t Have to Choose” 
S P O R T S  C H A P T E R  

Ball’s in your court, Netflix. 

ICE HOCKEY:

Ice hockey is training for our eventual war with the glaciers. 

They’ve encroached before and they’ll do it again. Remember the 

Titanic

! This 

Ice, you’re on thin ice. 

proud sport teaches us how to combat the ice menace using only sticks and a 

Zamboni. With ice hockey and our good friend global warming, we might just 

win the cold war again. 

WORLD’S  STRONGEST  MAN  COMPETITION: 

I’ve  said  it  before—it’s 

not really a sport unless there’s the possibility of dislodging your intestines. 

Luckily,  the  Met-Rx  World’s  Strongest  Man  Competition  fits  this  bill.  It  uses 

a complex and indisputable formula to crown its champion. You are truly the 

most powerful man on earth if you can pull a semi with your teeth, hurl a keg 

full of lead shot over a wall, and lift at least 20 natives of the impoverished 

country in which the event is held.3 

Items you must lift to be the World’s Strongest Man: 

A mule 

Rodin’s “The Thinker” 

Rodin’s ‘The Thinker” riding a mule 

A suitcase full of duty-free sambuca 

A train car packed with hobos 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Former Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert 

St. Paul, Minnesota 

The one-ton meatball lift is 
particularly hard. 

3   Every night I carry the weight of the nation on my shoulders. Top that, Iceland’s Magnus Ver Magnusson! 

77 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Hey, advertisers, why pay $2 million dollars for a 30-second Super Bowl spot, 

when you can pay considerably less for an ad here? Think about it. 

Seriously, keep 
thinking about it. 

Are you still thinking about it? 

COCKFIGHTING: There’s an easy way to tell which came first, the chicken  
or the egg: Attach a cockspur to both of them and let them fight it out.  

My money is on the egg. Those Grade A Jumbos have a lot of attitude.  

A good cockpit is 
a cross between a 
Thunderdome 
and a bucket of 
KFC Snackers™. 

If  you  are  lucky  enough  to  get  into  the  sport  of  cockfighting,  I  recommend   
fitting your cock with a Mexican straight blade. It’s a much quicker and cleaner  
kill. The Filipino curved blade is just cruel. 

FYI: Due to a last-minute bidding war, this chapter is now called:  

78 

T H E   K R A F T   S E V E N   S E A S   C R E A M Y   I T  A L I A N   S P O R T S   C H A P T E R  

T HE  KR A FT 
Seven Seas  
Creamy Italian 
SPORTS CH APTER 

Please refer to it accordingly. 

FIGURE  SKATING:  Figure  skating—including  individual  and  pairs,  but 

excluding  ice  dancing,  figure  skating’s  gay  cousin—has  everything  I  could 

possibly  wish  for  in  a  sport.  Speed,  beauty,  smooth  jazz,  sequins,  and  the 

chance  that  someone  could  at  any  moment  obliterate  every  tendon  in  their 

knees. While it is true that certain Soviet and Chinese people frequently outdo 

Americans at this sport, that’s OK because skating is 

all they ever do. 

BASKETBALL:

 We invented basketball, and it has become so popular that 

we’ve  developed  two  versions  of  it:  the  college,  or  “classic,”  version  of  the 

game,  in  which  rules  are  followed  and  at  most  above-average  athletes  can 

excel; and the NBA version of the game, in which 7-foot-tall monster freaks leap 

about  on  trampolines  while  swinging  their  massive  elbows  like  cudgels  and 

running four steps without dribbling before taking off from their opponent’s 

foul line to slam dunk. Each version can be appreciated on its own merits: the 

NBA for its display of superhuman abilities and larger-than-life personas, and 

college for its easy-to-understand gambling format. While it’s true that Team 

USA hasn’t come in better than 3rd place in most recent World Competitions, 

that’s OK, because the losses are more due to the hubris of our players than 

their abilities, thus teaching our children a sound moral lesson: If you make 

enough money in what you do, it doesn’t matter if you have your ass handed to 

you by a Lithuanian. 

79 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

TIME OUT: Nothing is less American than the Army-Navy game. Whichever 

side you pick, you’re rooting against our boys. The Army and Navy squads 

should be combined, and they should play football against teams from any 

other  country,  and  instead  of  footballs  they  would  used  bomb-balls.  And 

Air Force can do kickoffs. 

FOOTBALL: Football started out as a great idea: “What if we took rugby and 

got rid of the part where guys stick their heads in each others’ butts?” The idea 

caught on. Soon someone realized that the game would be even more fun if 

you could throw the ball forward. This change took football into its golden 

age, which continued until they switched over to cowhide. Much of the drama 

is gone from football these days, as technology has taken over. Plastic helmets 

have replaced the far more stylish helmets which were less about protecting 

the head and more about clothing it. 

When was the last 
time you heard of 
somebody with a 
leather football 
helmet getting hurt? 
Exactly. They work. 

SPORTS TO IGNORE 

Houston, we have a 
forward somersault 
pike. 

the International Space Station. 

DIVING:  Not  sure  what  the  big  achievement  is  in  walking  off  the  end  of  a 

plank and succumbing to gravity. Big deal. To really make the divers demon-

strate some skill, the diving events should be held in a zero-G environment like 

CYCLING: It seems a colossal waste to me to have a dozen cyclists, in peak 

condition,  furiously  pedaling  their  sleek  carbon-fiber  machines  at  mind-

boggling speeds…and not a single one of them is carrying a takeout order of 

Chinese food. Because once you’re past the age of 12, the only legitimate reason 

I can think of to get on a bicycle is to deliver someone’s steamy container of 

moo shu pork. I say we limit the cycling events to professional delivery boys 

and bike messengers, and here’s a thrilling twist I came up with the other night 

while watching The Road to Perdition: Each contestant is carrying an enve-

lope he’s supposed to deliver to the judge. Inside that envelope: an order to 

shoot the cyclist dead. The spectators know what’s in the notes—the athletes 

Next to Spandex bike 
shorts, jean shorts 
look macho. 

Don’t tell. 

have no idea!!!! 

80 

T H E   K R A F T   S E V E N   S E A S   C R E A M Y   I T  A L I A N   S P O R T S   C H A P T E R  

SYNCHRONIZED  SWIMMING: I defy you to watch this sport and tell me  I told you to ignore these. 

Skip Ahead! 

the Olympics have no hidden gay agenda, and probably some kind of nose clip 

kickback scheme going on as well. Besides, a sport in which you win by doing 

exactly what your partner is doing goes against our American tradition of indi-

viduality; it’s the aquatic equivalent of the Soviet army marching in lockstep 

through Red Square, if that army were also wearing women’s bathing suits and 

occasionally twirling in unison. So I reject synchronized swimming, and call 

instead for it to be replaced by an improvised freestyle underwater dance jam. 

Still gay, but now American gay. 

A QUICK NOTE ABOUT THE OLYMPICS 

The  Olympics  began  in  perversion:  greased  up  naked  men  slapping  hot 

sweaty body parts against one another’s taut and hairless flesh in pursuit of 

victory, like Chippendale’s dancers at an after-hours party. And the tradition 

of perversion4 continues—because as an international athletic competition, 

the Olympics are a warped, watered-down version of the only worthy contest 

Gold Medal Flour, 
this would be a 
great section of the 
chapter for you to 
sub-sponsor. 

between nations: war. 

True  arguments  over  international  status  are  not  settled  by  who  can  throw 

a fancy hubcap farther. They are settled by invasion. Sure, war takes longer 

than a 100-meter footrace, but it’s much more dramatic, and you don’t have 

to pretend to care about the bronze. Now, I’m not saying that every four years 

we should have a World War. Such a scenario would play hell with my stock 

portfolio.  I’m  simply  saying  that  the  modern  Olympics  should  be  more  like 

war, in that there should be consequences for winning and losing. The Koreans 

beat Italy in slalom? They get Michelangelo’s David. Rwanda beats Sweden in 

the high jump? They get to move to Sweden. If Afghanistan defeats us in the 

biathlon, they can have Connecticut. Warning to you, Connecticut—support 

our president. 

4 Called a “bi-athlon” for a reason 

81 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

FENCING: I like the concept. I don’t like the masks, or protective jumpsuits, 

and for God sake use a real sword, not those effete little French things. I mean, 

does “epee” sound like something you could open an artery with? You need 

a blade that wouldn’t embarrass a pirate, or maybe one of those martial arts 

swords that looks like a long walking stick but then when a guy tries to attack 

you, you pull it apart and whoosh! It’s actually two swords. Speaking of martial 

arts, a few throwing stars couldn’t hurt fencing, or any sport for that matter. 

And  can  we  please  get  rid  of  that  ridiculous  electronic  scoring  system  that 

uses sensors to tell us someone has made a hit? That’s what blood is for. 

A LEAGUE OF ONE’S OWN 

A NOTE ABOUT WOMEN’S SPORTS:

Now I’m not a misogynist, but women 

have no place in a man’s world, especially if that world is profitable sports. 

Let’s leave the multi-million-dollar contracts and rich product endorsements 

to the big boys and you ladies can stick to the ladylike sports, ones where you 

can wear skirts such as field hockey or the Scottish caber toss. 

82 

Lady like 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  FO R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

They say football is a game of inches, or maybe that’s 

baseball. You know what? Who cares? Because if you care 

about inches, play horseshoes. 

Football is the game I love. That’s why I’ll brave five-degree 

weather to stand in a beer line. Those guys are out there playin’ 

for me, the least I can do is show up and drink. 

Coming through with beers here! Coming through! Deb, can 

you grab one? C’mon. Drink fast and keep up with me, because 

I’m not gonna make extra trips for you in between my beer 

runs. You know exactly what I’m talkin’ about. 

So, why do I love football? Is it because of the action? 

The Guy Sitting Next 
to You At The Stadium 

You bet your sweet derri-ass, but that’s only part of the story, because the real game 

happens in the mind. It’s like chess. Kick ooofff! Let’s fucking do this! Run, you 

stupid son of a bitch! Run! Wedge, throw the wedge! Oh, come ooonnnnnn! Deb, 

you watching this?! What are you doing? Are you kidding me? Who are you talkin’ 

to? What are you talkin’ to her for? Fuck Deb, we’re at the game, what’s with all the 

talking? Why aren’t you drinkin’?  You’re already behind. 

I remember when I was a kid my Dad used to take me to the games. I used to keep a 

sheet on all the players. I remember all the great ones: Sweetness, Jack “The Assassin” 

Tatum, “Babalu,” “Bucketfoot Al,” “Le Demond Blond,” “Touchy Taffy,” and “Dr. 

Puntenstein.” Those guys gave a hundred and ten percent on the field every Sunday, 

just so a dad who wasn’t home much could have the chance to spend a few hours with 

his arm around his son sitting on a cold wooden seat sharing a beer. Ohhhhh! Look who 

they’re putting in! Whooo hooo! Pennington. Fucking Pennington! Hey, PENNINGTON! 

You pretty boy! You whiney country club pussy! It’s gonna be a long day, Pennington. 

It’s gonna be a looong fuckin’ day! Hold on to the ball you bastard! FUUUUUCK! Oh 

FUMBLE! Get on that BALL! Yeah!! Debbie, look-look. You see that big pile? I hear guys 

on the bottom of that thing are brutal. Gougin’ eyes, grabbin’ balls, squeezing balls, 

bitin’ balls. Wait, here comes the ref. What!!! Bullshit! COME ON! Bullll-Shit, Bullll-

Shit, Bullll-Shit! Yeah, Deb, you got it. Bullll-Shit! Did you see that shit? 

Hey, so uh Deb, what’d Tricia have to say? What!? I’m just trying to be interested. 

Jesus, Debbie. No! You’re so jealous. Forget it. No, seriously, forget it. Drop it. Jesus, 

Deb. Jesus. Let’s go DE-fense! Let’s get a STOP! 

Some things don’t change for the players, whether they’re home or away. When 

you’re on the field, you gotta knock people down, and you gotta put ’em down to stay 

down. That’s it. Easy math. But what does change is, when you’re home, you’ve got the 

fans. Fans can definitely sway a game. Collectively we’re like an extra player. All these 

people filling up these seats are like my teammates and we are here to rock the house 

and kick some ass. 

Nachos! 

  What the fuck man? You just cashed my fucking nachos! I had ’em balanced on the 

arm rest dipshit, and you rattled the whole row of seats with that fat train of yours! 

What the fuck are you doin’?! You gonna scoop the cheese off the ground too? No? 

Well, what the fuck good are nachos without the cheese? I don’t care how old he is, 

if he’s so upset, let him cover his fucking ears. What? Go ahead say it again! Say it 

agoddamngain, go ahead! I don’t a give shit, Deb! No, I won’t sit down! 

I’m gonna get more beer. 

Watch out, man. Beers coming through. Sack! Shit, yeah! Did you see that Deb!? 

How’s the turf taste, Sixteen? Huh? How’s that taste! You suck! You suck shit! Right 

Deb? 

Some Americans spend their Sundays in church, but football is my religion. This 

is where I worship, in the house that Lombardi built. INTERCEPTION! Oh-oh-OH 

YEAH! YEAH! GO! GO! YEAHHHHHH! That’s what I’m talking about! That’s what 

I’m GODDAMN TALKING ABOUT! Touchdown! High five, Deb! ALRIGHT! You blow, 

Sixteen! Nice pussy-toss to the wrong team! You gay fag fuck! Whooohoooooooo! 

FUN 

ZONE 

It’s customary in the sport of baseball to have the sitting U.S. President throw out the 

first pitch of the season. Match the former chief of state with his historical toss. 

a 

b 

c 

d 

1 After his pitch had catcher stuffed and mounted 

2 Handed ball to welfare queen 

3 Lobbed two-finger V-sign sinker 

4 Used his steam powered mechanical arm to hurl a perfect strike 

UNJUMBLE THE HINT 
2 R A N K L I N F   D E L AO N   O O S E V E L E T R       1 T E DY D   R O S O E V E LT       3 C H A R D R I C H   N I X N O   4 W I L L I A M   H .   TA F T  

FUN ZONE: THE INTERACTIVE EDITION 

LIAR’S POKER 

If ESPN’s wall-to-wall coverage of poker is to be believed, lumpy, dour-faced, 

be-sunglassed middle-aged men are the new Titans of Sport. But 52 cards can be so 

bulky to carry around in your wallet. 

Well, here’s a game where all you need are the bills in your pocket. We take turns 

bidding on the total number of certain digits in the serial numbers found on U.S. 

currency.  The digits are ranked in the following order: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0, 1 (aces). 

I always play with twenties. 

I’ll start.  I bid five aces.  Send me your twenty to see if you’ve won! 

fig 8. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C HAPT ER 6  

SEX   AN D  DATING 

“Feel like makin’ love.”
 –Bad Company, bad influence 

SEX! 

THAT  I  HAVE  YOUR  ATTENTION,  I 

NOW 

WANT  TO  TALK  ABOUT  SEX.1  IF  I 

HAD TO SUM UP SEX IN ONE WORD, 

IT  WOULD  BE  THIS  ONE:  “SEX  IS 

POWER.” AND IF I HAD AN EXTRA WORD: “SEX IS A GIFT 

FROM  GOD.”  BUT  BEFORE  I  GO  ON  TO  THE  GOOD  STUFF, 

AND BELIEVE ME THIS CHAPTER GETS STEAMIER THAN A 

coed clambake, there’s something I have to do. You see, I’m a role model. A lot  Thank you, Elvis! 
of young folks look up to me. And I don’t want to get them into trouble with sex.  
So if you’re a young person who’s not yet married, before reading on, you must  
read and sign the following pledge.  

1 You seem a little tense.  I give a great massage—maybe that will loosen you up? 

87 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

SEX AND DATING CHAPTER PLEDGE FOR UNWED YOUTH 

I,  the  undersigned,  pledge  to  remain  sexually  abstinent  until  married  to  a 

person of the opposite sex and of legal age. I swear that any knowledge I gain 

in the following pages regarding human sexuality will be applied only in the 

private context of a nuptial bed, nuptial kitchen, nuptial bathroom floor, or 

incorporated  into  anecdotes  to  provoke  awe  in  my  peers.  Should  I  one  day 

successfully employ any of the information, tips, or techniques provided herein 

in conjunction with my spouse, I pledge that after a reasonable period of no 

longer than 24 hours I will credit it/them to Stephen Colbert. So help me God. 

Signature of Pledge-Taker: 

Notarize here: 

Signature of Pledge-Taker’s Parent or Guardian 

All right, let’s get freaky. 

As  I  mentioned,  sex  is  power—the  power  to  create  life,  the  power  to  ruin 

your life, and the power to sex it up good. If you refuse that power, you’ll be 

cheating yourself, and in my case, hundreds of lovely ladies, out of something 

very special (my penis). But even though sex can be wonderful, it can also be 

scary, like a maniac, or a haunted house—two things that happen to go great 

with sex. 

Now, before I stimulate you further, I should address a fundamental question: 

Why do we have sex? I’m on record as preaching abstinence. I talk about it 

on  my  TV  show,  elsewhere  in  this  book,  in  pamphlets  I  hand  out  on  street 

corners, and occasionally in sky-writing. But there is a proper time to have 

sex: when you want to reproduce. The body parts to which we are attracted 

are directly linked to child production and nurturing. For men, it’s the breasts 

that provide our offspring nutrition, the legs to which they cling, the lips that 

88 

S E X   A N D   D A  T I N G  

kiss the babies goodnight, and the small of the back that teaches our children 

about the folly of tattoos.2 

For women, it’s the balls. Nothing the ladies love more than a big sack. I mean 

something a cartoon bandit would carry out of a bank. 

Whew. Racy stuff. That poetic description of what a woman yearns for may 

Sexy! 

have heated the blood of some of my female readers, even some of those who 

signed the abstinence pledge. Remember, you took an oath! So, here’s a little 

scripture sorbet to cool your palate. 

“It is God’s will that you should be sanctified: that you should avoid  

 sexual immorality.” 

—1 Thessalonians 4:3 

Exactly. It may be Chad’s will that you chug a few wine coolers and drive up 

to  the  lake,  “’cause  it’s  really  beautiful  up  there,”  but  who  are  you  going  to 

listen to on this one: an omnipotent deity or a management trainee at Outback 

And  for  any  male  readers  who  found  my  bandit  imagery  arousing,  here  is 

Regional manager, 
maybe 

Steakhouse? 

another passage: 

“If a man lies with a man as one lies with a woman, both of them have 

done what is detestable. They must be put to death.” 

—Leviticus 20:13 

This is not homophobic. 
It’s homo-cidal. 

Okay. Sexual fire quenched. Let’s move on. 

RIGHT  THERE!  Sex  is  like  the  death  penalty:  one  outcome,  so  many 

different ways of carrying it out. 

STRAIGHT  TALK:  Even  though  both  men  and  women  enjoy  sex,  they 

approach  it  very  differently.  Let’s  be  honest.  Men  think  about  sex  non-stop, 

and that’s not just a stereotype. It happens on sitcoms and in advertisements 

all the time. 

2  If you think temporary tattoos are okay, perhaps I can interest you in some temporary eternal damnation? 

89 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

They even have a 
different word for it: 
“Love.” 

Women  don’t  feel  that  way  about  sex.  They  prize  emotion  over  physicality. 

They want a partner who is considerate and attentive, who will spoon them 

while reciting Keats and feed them organic yogurt by candlelight on a seaside 

cliff at sunset. 

But  here  comes  the  Women’s  Studies  Brigade,  railing  about  how  Colbert  is 

reinforcing gender stereotypes. Well, ladies, we have those stereotypes for a 

reason—a reason I can’t remember right now because I’m too busy thinking 

about  sex  more  than  you  do.  Don’t  be  a  knuckle  sandwich.  The  sooner  we 

accept the basic differences between men and women, the sooner we can stop 

Pink = girl, blue = boy. 
(Though powder blue 
is a little fey.) 

arguing about it and start having sex.3 

THE TAKE-ME-HOME: Treat sex like alcohol. Whether you sip it or chug it 

or have a destructive chemical dependency on it, make sure you’re in control. 

When  you  bring  that  frosty  can  of  sex  to  your  lips,  you’d  better  be  the  one 

calling the shots. One way to tell if you’re losing control is if during the past 

three months, in order to get more sex in a shorter amount of time, you have 

Don’t become a slave 
to sex. Agree on a 
safe word. 

resorted to using a funnel. 

WHEN ANIMALS ATTACK OUR MORALS 

As  you  can  see,  when  you  follow  the  rules  there  is  nothing  more  beautiful 

than  two  mature  people  who  are  in  a  committed,  loving  relationship  doing 

something unspeakably debasing. 

The key word there is “people,” because when it comes to 

doing “it” right, there is no greater threat to our democratic 

sexual values than the Animal Kingdom. Every day, scien-

tists report more species engaging in homosexual behavior, 

while cable television offers a full slate of animal sex propa-

ganda ranging from Animal Planet to Dora the Explorer. 

Chilling endorsement of 
human/ape relations 

Our proud tradition of structured human courtship is under attack—the lions 

are circling, waiting for our children to wander away from the village so they 

Odds are it’s a 
gay pride. 

can hump in front of them. 

90 

3  Although sometimes there’s nothing better than having sex while arguing. 

S E X   A N D   D A  T I N G  

GOOD 

Missionary 
position, followed 
by firm handshake 

Need  proof?  Look  no  further  than  where  animals  rank  on  my  continuum  of 

sexual morality: 
BAD 

Gay stuff 

4 
“Doggy Style” 

Pity sex 

Missionary 
Position 

Accidental 

Here be dragons 

Non-historical 
role-play 

Immaculate 
Conception 

“Fishy Style” 

Emotionless 
Congress 

Anything done  
through a sheet 

For our future’s sake, Nation, I resolved to learn everything there is to know 

about these godless Zoodomites. Join me as I barge into Nature’s bedchambers, 

shining the spotlight of my judgment on its bestial copulations. 

BRIEF LIST OF ANIMALS THAT HAVE SEX 

1. Dogs

2. Elephants

3. Spiders

4. Bears

5. Owls

6. Whales

7. Barn Owls

…and hundreds more. 

Folks,  in  the  Animal  Kingdom,  you  can’t  turn  over  a  rock  without  finding  a 

half  dozen  earthworms  doing  the  horizontal  spermatophore,  with  nary  a 

wedding ring in sight. Like we don’t have enough fatherless annelids crowding 

our  driveways  and  compost  heaps.  I  don’t  care  if  you  are  an  adult  in  worm 

years, Mr. Worm—if you can’t handle tending a few thousand cocoons, don’t 

ventrally fertilize your hermaphroditic partner.5 

And did you know that ants have sex? It can’t be for procreation—there are  Aunts also have sex. 

plenty of ants already. No, the simple truth is they delight in fornicating—and 

in plain sight of human picnics, no less. I guess that’s part of the sick thrill. 

4  Believe me, what dogs actually do is far worse than their namesake style. 
5  If you lost your lunch at “spermatophore,” then whatever you do, don’t look up “hemipenis.”  

91 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

I VOTE “NEIGH”: Sorry horses, but the only thing I want to see mounting 

another horse is a jockey. 

If  humans  should  be  following  anyone’s  example,  it’s  the  tiger.  Males  and 

females lead chaste, solitary existences for almost their entire adult lives, until 

the  man  decides  it’s  time  to  have  children,  spends  months  tracking  a  mate 

without her knowledge, then with a mighty roar leaps from the underbrush and 

snarls until the female performs a sexy dance. When the male is sufficiently 

entertained he bites her neck and initiates the miracle of life, I’m sure in a loving 

way.  Sometimes  the  most  beautiful,  intimate  connections  only  occur  after  a 

good, long stalking. I think it’s easy for humans, especially women, to forget 

that. And really, ladies, when’s the last time you worked on your sexy dance? 

Unfortunately,  most  of  today’s  women  resemble  bowerbirds  that  force 

suitors to build elaborate nests of twigs, leaves, and discarded garbage before 

choosing  a  mate.  Any  male  who  doesn’t  meet  her  standards  doesn’t  get  to 

Saw this on PBS, but 
I didn’t pledge a cent. 

mate that year; one assumes he just stays in his bower, reads bower manuals, 

and watches bowerbird porn. Hey gals, not every guy is Ryan Gosling from 

The Notebook. 

Even  worse  is  the  seahorse.  The  man  seahorse  shoulders  the  burden  of 

carrying  baby  seahorses  to  term.  The  seahorse  is  by  far  the  most  whipped 

animal, and by far the most frequently cited in my own marriage. 

Of  course,  you  could  also  be  a  male  octopus,  who  after  a 

lovely  evening  of  cephalopod  merriment,  gently  fills  one  of 

his arms with sperm before detaching said arm and watching 

it crawl into his life-mate’s mantle cavity. Oh, don’t worry, he 

doesn’t feel a thing BECAUSE HE’S DEAD. Remember how 

he detached part of his body? It just proves that even under 

the sea, women will go to any length to limit a man’s options. 

Hold on to those arms, fellas, I don’t care if she has the ocean’s 

Is this an octopus
mating? Who knows? 

most iridescent chromatophores. 

92 

S E X   A N D   D A  T I N G  

By far the most promiscuous animal is the bonobo, a species 

of chimpanzee that will apparently swing on any vine: girl-on-

girl, guy-on-guy, something called “penis fencing.” All they’re 

missing is a sub-class of bonobo pornographers to roll tape 

they can sell to hard-luck bowerbirds. 

Luckily, for every bonobo there’s a…New Mexico whiptail 

Their “monkey 
business” ?  
Peddling smut. 

lizard! 

Wondering  why  you’ve  never  heard  of  these  from  the  Free-Animals’-Willies 

crowd?  Maybe  it’s  because  they  don’t  have  sex  at  all.  They  reproduce  by 

parthenogenesis, the way God intended. It’s got Genesis right there in the name. 

It’s a travesty that these reptilian paragons of morality go sorely neglected as 

high school mascots, while sex fiends like Hawks, Cougars, and Wildcats get 

stitched onto our daughters’ sweaters! 

GUT CHECK: So far, you’ve learned everything you always wanted to know 

about sex that I was willing to tell you. Except one thing: how to get it. In olden 

days, it was simple. You just accepted her along with a large amount of gold to 

cement the merger of your Empires. But today it can be so complicated. 

TALES FROM THE HEART: 

The year: yesteryear. 

The scene: a bowling alley. 

I was on my first date with Tr-cy G-ll-w-y (as a gentleman, I never reveal the 

vowels in the names of my former conquests).6 She was a dark-haired beauty 

I had met the previous Sunday at a fraternity mixer. Back then, I was shy, and 

it had taken me all night to work up the courage to send a letter to her parents 

requesting their permission to take her out. Lucky for me, they had returned it 

with the “yes” box checked. So here I was, watching lovely Tr-cy approach the 

lane with a determined stride. Needless to say, I crushed her, 134 to 62. Women 

respond to dominance, and when I got that tenth frame spare, I knew I had 

I got to th-rd b-s-. 

sealed the deal. 

MY TURN: I’ve had hundreds of girlfriends. 

6 Tr-cy G-ll-w-y is actually a composite of several girls I dated, including Tracy McGee and Evie Galloway. 

93 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Growing up, I lived in a strict household. All I knew of the opposite sex was 

what  I  read  on  my  mom’s  shampoo  bottles.  Women  cared  about  smelling 

terrific, and they liked to be made to feel soft, silky, and very shiny. While other 

kids started “petting” and “going down to petting town” as early as sophomore 

year,  I  was  a  late  bloomer.  But  I  don’t  regret  it,  because  once  I  bloomed,  I 

turned out to be just what women love: a sex flower. 

I’ll admit it: I miss my swinging bachelor days. I used to have dating down to 

a science. But now that I’ve permanently and happily hung up my single-guy 

sombrero, I’m glad to share my trade secrets with the next generation. 

I have received many 
compliments on my 
stamen. 

It’s on a hook in 
my attic. 

FOR THE LADIES 

Dating Do’s 

First, some crucial advice: Be on your guard. You might be looking for a life 

partner, but your date’s most likely looking for a disco partner. Being cautious 

lets a man know that he’ll have to put in some effort to make your acquaintance, 

and the right kind of guy will respect you for it. That said, show some cleavage. 

It lets a man know that you’re confident enough to show some cleavage. So put 

on something that makes you feel like he’ll feel you’re sexy, and get ready to 

have fun. If you go out to dinner, let him pay. You deserve it. Plus, offering to 

pay makes you look like you’ve got money to burn. Before you know it, he’ll 

be hitting you up for loans and asking to borrow your car. I’ve done it dozens 

of times. And during the meal, order something that will get his attention, 

like a side of bacon for dessert. I can’t think of anything sexier. 

Real ladies want a Real Man. What’s a Real Man? Well, I’m a Real Man, and 

there’s  nothing  I  can  do  about  that,  even  though  some  people  want  me  to 

apologize  for  it.  Well,  no  go.  I  will  continue  treating  a  lady  like  a  lady  even 

though  it’s  enough  to  get  you  smacked  with  a  lawsuit  these  days.  My  legal 

defense team has advised me not to say more about it than that. 

Except maybe 
Canadian bacon.  
Exotic. 

FOR THE FELLAS 

How to entice a woman 

94 

S E X   A N D   D A  T I N G  

So, what is a Real Man, again? 

A Real Man is someone who walks through life the way a pilot walks through 

an airplane. Cool, calm, and checking out the sexy stews. No matter how tough 

the situation gets, a Real Man never lets on about the faulty landing gear. 

They’ll find out 
soon enough. 

The point is, if you want to attract the ladies, there are a few things you will 

need to know about being a man, and luckily for you, you’ve come to the right 

book. 

How to tie a bowtie 

Let’s face it—ladies like a man who looks good, and part of this means dressing 

well. In my line of work, I’m in a tuxedo all the time. It’s the Emmys one week, 

announcing a boxing match the next. But even if you’re a garbage man or you 

work at MSNBC, you’re going to want to know how to tie a bowtie. Clip-ons are 

for losers. Nothing ruins your special date night faster than having someone 

come up to you and say, “Can we get some more shrimp puffs?” 

So here’s how you do it… 

Start  with  the  left  end  a  little  longer  than  the  right  end.  That’s  your  left.  If 

someone else is tying it on you, it’s their right. If you’re left-handed, you’re on 

your own. Now, slip the short end under the long end. After that, slip the long 

end under the short end.7 Now, fold the short end into a bow shape and, holding 

that against your neck, fold the long flap over the front of the tie. There should 

be a little pocket in there. Push the rest of the tie through that. Goddamn it! 

That does not look right. Take that part of the tie out. Pinch it a little and feed 

it through there until it looks nice. Smooth out the right side. Slip a finger into 

the  left  bow.  Pull  the  left  bow  through  the  hole.  Great,  it’s  all  jumbled.  Try 

holding on to the right side. Man, this looks like shit. Let’s start again. 

Okay, grab the three layers on the right and gently pull the left bow through the 

hole. Flatten the left half of the front. That’ll have to do. 

Hint: Buy an ascot. 

How to act in the Men’s locker room 

This really doesn’t have anything to do with dating, but hey, as a man it’s some-

thing you should know. The gym is a minefield of homo-danger. So watch your 

The towel-snapping 
alone 

eyes.  I  recommend  focusing  on  the  lockers  themselves.  Examine  the  metal 

7 That’s what she said!!! 

95 

Flipside? She’ll 
go halfsies. 

your friend.

How to act on the first date 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

ventilation grooves and how the latch engages with the lock. One misplaced 

look  can  lead  to  all  sorts  of  unpleasant  misunderstandings.  We’ve  all  been 

there.  One  minute  you’re  toweling  off  your  shins,  next  moment  you’re  at  a 

nightclub named “The Gandy Dancer” toweling off everything else. 

How to ask out a woman 

98% of the confusion in modern relationships starts right here. Be direct about 

your intentions, like this: “Good evening, (Insert Girl Name Here), would you 

be interested in going on a date and potentially bearing my children and quit-

ting your job to raise them?” They’ll appreciate your candor. Don’t fall into the 

trap of saying something like “Hey, how would you like to hang out sometime?” 

Then the girl doesn’t know if it’s a date or not. And one thing leads to another 

and the next thing you know you’re living with a woman who might just be 

If you want your first date to lead to another, follow these two simple rules. 

One, ALWAYS order for the woman. She’s wrapped up in food issues. A woman 

is afraid if she orders the entrée she’s going to look like a pig, but if she only 

gets a salad, you’ll think she’s anorexic. Take the guilt and shame away from 

her. Plus, it lets her know who’s going to be in charge in the bedroom. Two, 

don’t  do  all  the  talking.  It’s  rude.  Do  two-thirds  of  the  talking.  That’s  why  I 

keep a chess clock in my jacket pocket. 

Lower your expectations 

A  date  doesn’t  have  to  be  perfect.  You’re  not  going  to  the  barber,  for  gosh-

sakes. Are you about to meet the woman of your dreams? Probably not. So 

just think of each date as a love scrimmage to prepare you for the marriage 

playoffs. Nobody’s keeping score. But for the record, I’m winning. 

Chivalry  never  goes  out  of  style.  Open  doors;  pull  out  chairs;  offer  to  undo 

No way around it, women will judge your potential in the sack by how you 

acquit yourself on the dance floor. So, a few rules. Never dance alone. If you 

Be a gentleman 

your own belt. 

How to dance 

96 

S E X   A N D   D A  T I N G  

have  to,  hover-dance  around  the  perimeter  of  a  group  of  women  dancing 

together and wait for one to respond to your display. Try holding your arms 

akimbo. In the poor lighting of a dance club, this makes you appear larger. If 

one of them does turn to you, apply your move. I do what I call the “Colbert 

Shuffle.” I shuffle to the left for four steps, then shuffle back to the right for 

Pointing and 
laughing is a 
response. 

four steps. Adjust to tempo. 

THE COLBERT SHUFFLE 

FINDING THAT SPECIAL SOMEONE 

Let face it: Finding Mr./Miss Right is no picnic. 

Have you tried 
looking at a picnic? 

But where others see a problem, I see a free-market opportunity. That’s why I’ve 

set up my own dating service for the Colbert Nation. I call it ColbertCoupling. 

It’s  a  great  way  for  like-minded  heroes  like  you  to  meet  one  another,  and  it 

should be up and running at the ColbertNation.com website by the time you 

read this. [Editors note: Due to a class action lawsuit, this web service is no 

longer available.] 

My single friends say they’re frustrated with popular dating sites like eHarmony 

and  Match.com.  No  matter  how  much  they  lie  on  their  questionnaires,  they 

can’t find that special someone. The problem is that too many of these sites 

rely on touchy-feely “emotional compatibility,” when really all that matters is 

that you agree on most things. And if you’re reading this, you do agree on most 

things, which are the things I agree on, so you’ve got a head start. 

Here’s a sample of the questionnaire potential lovebirds will encounter at my 

web  portal.  Why  not  stop  by  and  give  it  a  shot?  (Especially  if  you’re  a  lady. 

Honestly, it’s kind of a sausage-fest at the moment.) 

97 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

 Esq. 

 The Damned 

Last:

D.F.A.

Name: 

First: 

 M.D.

Check One: 

Body Shape:

Political leaning:

a. Male seeking Female

 b. Female seeking Male

 c. Other (seeking Eternal Hellfire) 

 a. Apple

 b. Pear

 c. Starfruit

 d. Human 

 a. Republican

 b. Libertarian

 c. Republitarian

 d. Right-leaning 

 e. Conservative

 f. Conservacanitive

 g. Republiservative

 h. Independent 

Liberpublican

(Republican) 

Religion:

George W. Bush:

 a. Catholic

 b. Other 

a. Great President

 b. Greatest President 

Highest level of education:

Marital Status:

 a. High School

 b. Your old man

·s belt

 c. Liberty University

 d. There

·s a letter after “c”? 

 a. Single

 b. Flying solo

 c. Alone

 d. …so alone… 

Favorite Colbert Report Episode:

 a. #1013

 b. #1144

 c. #2087

 d. #3011 

Favorite friend from Fox and Friends:

 a. Steve Doocy

 b. Brown haired guy who isn·t Steve Doocy

 c. Whichever blonde lady they have now 

98 

S E X   A N D   D A T I N G  

Looks are…

 a. important to me

 b. very important to me

 c. just plain empirically important

 d. not important to me (blind from birth.) 

I tend to think…

 a. outside the box

 b. inside the box

 c. directly on the box

 d. near a box 

I tend to see the glass as…

 a. half empty

 b. half full

 c. a handy weapon in a bar fight 

 a. McKinley

 b. Garfield

 c. Lincoln

 d. Martin Sheen 

My goals in the bedroom:

 a. Be fruitful

 b. Multiply 

If I assassinated any president, it would have been…

How satisfied am I with my looks? 

 a. Very

b. Smugly 

What would I do for love?

 a. Anything

 b. Not that 

If I w

ere a character in an Ayn Rand novel, I

·d be…

 a. Howard Roark

 b. Ellsworth Tooey

 c. The guy from 

 d. A total jerk 

Anthem

If I were a member of the Supreme Court, and a tree, and a dessert topping, I·d be... 

a. Samuel Alito / Oak / Hot Fudge 

b. John Roberts /Ash / Butterscotch

 c. Steven Breyer  / Pine / Chocolate Jimmies

 d. Clarence Thomas / Sycamore / Antonin Scalia 

Mouth capacity:

 a. Five eggs

 b. Twelve marshmallows

 c. Ten ping-pong balls

 d. Fist

 e. 16 fl. oz. (jaw wired shut) 

99 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

If I came across a tortoise lying on its back in the desert, I would:

 a. Flip it over and carry it to safety

 b. Hit it with a hockey stick and see how far it slides

 c. Spin it in place and see how long it spins

 d. Deny that I am an android 

My high school yearbook voted me Most ____:

 a. Single

 b. Likely to Snap

 c. Teachers Dated

 d. Uncategorizable 

When I·m really feeling blue, I:

 a.Write poetry

 b. Take a walk in the park

 c. Drag TV under the covers and watch DVDs in my bed fort

 d. Make everyone within reach as miserable as me 

From the list of life skills below, choose the three things that you do best:

 Negotiating business transactions 

Missionary work

 Raising/Caring for Children

 Suppressing votes

 Pleasuring my partner

 Gospel puppetry 

Remaining “Chertoff-like” 

during a crisis 

Scrapbooking

Communicating my thoughts and feelings 
(about immigrants) 

 Making the trains run on time

 Blocking abortion clinics

 Being a good friend/ narc

 Car Maintenance and Repair

 Community Service—voluntary

 Union busting

 Shopping

 Home Shopping

Anything else you·d like to add?

 a. No

Key: 

0-25 points – Passionate 

74-85 points – Cold Fish 

 Community service—court ordered

 I am double-jointed

 Questionnaire-filling 

 b. Yes, but you

·ve given me no space to do so 

25-73 points – Red Hot Lover 

86-100 points – Human Piñata 

S E X   A N D   D A  T I N G  

THE LOVE OF LAST RESORT 

Of course, while you’re beating the bushes for a mate, the answer might be to 

just shake the family tree. An attractive cousin might fall out.8 

Now, Nation, I have always been pro-cousin marriage. It is a great way to keep 

the bloodline pure. My own family tree is not so much a tree as it is a circle. 

Kind of looks like a tree eating itself. 

And there’s nothing wrong with it. 

Don’t believe me? Let’s ask God. He’s got some hard and fast rules 

in this area. 

Let’s see…Leviticus Chapter 18 Verse 12 – “Thou shalt not uncover the naked-

ness of thy father’s sister”…blah blah blah “thy mother’s sister”…yeech…“of 

thy father’s brother”…man there were some sick Levites…”of thy daughter-in-

law”…fair enough…“of thy brother’s wife.” Nope! Nothing about cousins. 

This is great news, because dating your cousin is only a few nucleotides away 

from dating yourself. And I don’t know about you, but I rarely get through the 

morning shave without wanting to ask myself out. Will I say yes? Who knows? 

I’ve yet to get up the courage. 

YOU  CAN’T  HURRY  LOVE—but  you  can  certainly  take  the  shortcut. 

Instead of paging through Match.com, try flipping through the family photo 

album. 

Did you know that the U.S. is the only Western country with cousin-marriage 

restrictions? Hey Congress, stay out of our bedrooms! Unless, of course, those 

bedrooms are filled with gay people. 

Gay cousins? 
Tough call. 

8 Hope he doesn’t fall too far.  Hemophiliacs bruise easily. 

101 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

CANARY IN A COAL MINE 

I  hope  that  the  Heroes  out  there  heed  my  advice  and  find  the  love  they 

deserve, because there are a lot of people who don’t want men and women 

to get together. They’d rather see us in constant battle, a war between the 

sexes, where the battleground is sex itself.

Case in point: Kegels.

Now, if you’re like me, when you hear the word “Kegel” you immediately 

think of the German word for ten-pin bowling, or kegeln. Well, the other day 

I was searching the Internet for news on the latest standings in the profes-

sional Kegel league and I got the shock of my life when this shocking page 

from the Mayo Clinic popped up:

Kegel exercises: 
How to strengthen your pelvic floor muscles. 

Now,  I’m  not  squeamish  about  the  female,  you  know,  parts.  But  I’m  not 

about  to  go  into  detail  about  what  this  “clinic”  is  suggesting  women  do. 

Suffice  it  to  say,  they  must  want  women  to  work  out  the  muscles  down 

there for a reason of their own.

These  strengthening  exercises  are  called  “kegels”  and  are  named  for  Dr. 

Arnold M. Kegel M.D. I’ve heard of some weird fetishes, but this guy must 

have been a real sicko. 

Now, the ladies who sign on and install a Bowflex™ in their privates say that 

there are all sorts of benefits, including increased sexual pleasure for both 

partners. I’m not buying it. Hey, everyone loves a firm handshake, but who 

wants to buy a car from the salesman who crushes your hand in a death 

The worst part is that their operation is covert. Any woman could be doing 

it at any time, any place. Look around you right now. Do you see a woman? 

Is she flexing? There’s no legal way to know. 

grip?

102 

S E X   A N D   D A  T I N G  

What the hell are they training for? It ain’t pickin’ stawberries. 

And they got us where they want us. Might as well put a bear trap in a honey 

pot. 

So fellas, you’ve been warned. From here on out, every casual conquest has 

been turned into a deadly game of vaginal roulette. 

Wow, “vaginal roulette.” That was a little racy. I’m out of breath, and I’m sure 

so are some of you. Let’s take a cool shower in Matthew 5:29—“If your eye 

—even if it is your good eye—causes you to lust, gouge it out and throw it 

away.” 

I feel better already. 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  FO R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

Hey there. I’m your soul mate, the one person on this 

earth who’s perfect for you in every way. Yes, I exist, and yes, 

everyone else you’ve been with is a pale substitute. We’re meant 

to be together, but we’ve never met. 

You see, there are 6 billion people in the world and you 

encounter at most about 1,000 people per day, so statistically 

our paths would cross only once every 16,500 years. If we’re 

going to beat those odds you need to work harder, because so 

Your Soul Mate 

far you’ve done a spectacular job of messing this up. 

Remember when you bought that pack of gum and the clerk 

asked if you wanted a bag, but you were in a rush so you said no? If you’d waited that 

extra three seconds you would have missed the next train, making you late for the 

play, so they wouldn’t have let you in the theater until the first scene was over, and I 

103 

would have entered the lobby—also late—and we’d have gotten to talking. We prob-

ably would have just skipped the play and gotten coffee and then…Pow! Fifty years of 

golden summers at the lake house. 

Another example: Remember when you signed up for a yoga class? You should have 

signed up for a pottery class. I was taking a pottery class! How hard is that to figure 

out? And don’t just sign up for a pottery class next time, because I might have moved 

on to hip-hop cardio. I can’t tell you exactly where I’ll be because if you’re really my 

soul mate you’ll just know. Please just get it right. Last time, I dealt with my disappoint-

ment by sleeping with the pottery instructor. 

I guess what I’m saying is, next time you think about going to the museum today 

instead of tomorrow when I’ll be there, ask yourself: Do you really want to spend the 

rest of your life alone? Are you going to take the bus or are you going to walk? If you 

do walk and it’s raining, how are you going to see me under my umbrella, unless I don’t 

have one and you share yours, or I share mine and that’s how we meet? So remember: 

Never leave the house without an umbrella… or with one. It’s your choice. I think I 

explained pretty clearly what’s at stake. 

Are you reading this at a book store? I’m right behind you. Turn around! 

Am I still there? 

God, you’re a slow reader. 

Point is, hanging over every decision you make, however small, is the sword of 

our loneliness. I am out there. Find me. But please hurry. I know we’re meant to be 

together for eternity, but I can’t wait forever. 

Oh my God! I just ran into my pottery teacher. That’s so random. 

FUN 

ZONE 

SEXUAL ROLE-PLAY QUIZ 

Keeping a relationship fresh for years after attraction has faded takes work.  I’m talking 

about Fantasy role-playing. 

It’s a time-tested sexual super-charger that allows a couple 

to pretend in an intimate and loving way that they are making love to someone they don’t 

know.  But just because it’s naughty, doesn’t mean it’s a free for all. There are rules.  

If your 

spouse comes out of the bathroom wearing nothing but a red hood and a basket of goodies, 

you sure as hell better have a wolf head on. 

Match these other sexual fantasy players from the left column with their appropriate 

partner on the right.  Good luck! 

TK

fig 9. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C HAPT ER 7  

HO M O SE XU ALS 

“Just wrap your legs ’round these velvet rims. 
And strap your hands ’cross my engines.”
 –“Bruce,” Rock-Hard Jersey Shore-boy 

AM  A  GAY  AMERICAN.  AND 

I 

COULDN’T  BE  GAYER  NOW  THAT 

THE  GAYS  ARE  ON  THE  RUN.  OF 

COURSE, I’M USING “GAY” THE WAY 

OUR FOUNDING FATHERS INTENDED, TO MEAN “HAPPY,” 

BEFORE IT WAS STOLEN FROM THEM BY THE GAYS, JUST 

LIKE THEY STOLE THEIR TIGHTS, WIGS, AND CODPIECES. 

Nation, we’re at War. And we can’t let the gays gain any more ground on our 

American language. Which is why we’re going to start taking their words. First 

word  we  reclaim?  “Homosexual.”  From  now  on,  it’s  going  to  mean  what  it 

always should have: heterosexual. Think about it. “Homo” means “the same.” 

And we’re all born with the same sexual orientation—straight. Ask any baby. 

If you don’t share my outrage about this, the homosexual agenda has already 

got you in its velvet grip. Want to know what its other hand is doing? Just use 

your  imagination.  You’re  probably  picturing  something  pretty  steamy,  right? 

Maybe a filthy little scenario taking place in a bathroom stall of a TGIFriday’s 

Girl babies, 
drop that teat 

while  your  wife  and  kids  unsuspectingly  eat  their  chicken  wings.  And  your 

$8.95 for 10 wings!? 

little  gay  fantasy  just  proves  my  point.  Every  single  one  of  us  fights  a  daily 

battle to suppress the insurgency raging in our loins. It’s a long hard slog, and 

we’ve all had the urge to cut and run. 

107 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

THINGS THAT ARE TRYING TO TURN ME GAY 
and 
THEIR SUCCESS ON A SCALE OF ONE TO TEN 

Gay People 

Throw Rugs 

Clive Owen 

Origami 

Dog-Whispering 

4 

7 

8 

2 

6 

Baby Carrots 

11 

108 

H O M O S E X U A L S  

But  Americans  are  fighters.  We  didn’t  give  up  in  World  War  II  against  the 

Germans just because Nazism “felt good.” The homosexual agenda is nothing 

more than appeasement. They are sexual Neville Chamberlains. They want us 

to lay down our arms and pick up rainbow-colored white flags. But we can’t let 

a.k.a. 
“Richard Chamberlains” 

them win our hearts and minds with their thighs and abs. We must crush them. 

Now I’ve got nothing against gay people. I just don’t like how they flaunt it. I’m 

perfectly fine with someone choosing to be gay, as long as he marries a woman 

and has kids like the rest of us. And if he has to flaunt it, there’s a place for that: 

in the privacy of his own home. Which should be a jail cell. 

Gentrify that! 

GUT-SPEAKING: We all know that people in prison engage in homosexual 

acts, right? Which means that criminals are more likely to be homosexuals. 

So wouldn’t it save us a lot of tax dollars to simply throw all gay people in 

prison? You know, cut out the middleman. 

WHAT IS THE PROBLEM? 

The problem is, these days there are more and more positive gay role models. 

When did gays become people to look up to? What happened to the good ol’ 

stereotype of the creepy guy sneaking back and forth from the bar with no 

windows to the movie theater that doesn’t say what it’s showing? 

Turn on the TV these days and it’s a virtual Pride Parade of admirable homosex-

uals. Ellen. Melissa Etheridge. Lance Bass. All the more respectable because 

they have the courtesy to identify themselves, unlike the “Surprise Gays.” The 

SG’s are celebrities that act manly and tough, then years later, they “come out 

of the pantry,” and your friends start looking at you funny for having posters of 

them up in your weight room. All of a sudden, no one wants to spot you. 

Hey fellas, how come 
no middlewoman? 

Also, the movie was 
never in focus. 

109 

 

S

L
A
U
X
E
S
O
M
O
H

 

T
R
A
T
S

 
 
 
 

 

w
o

l
l
a

 
l
l
i

w

 
t
a
h
t
 
t
r
a
h
c
 
w
o
l
f
 
y
d
n
a
h

 
s
i
h
t
 

d
e
n
g
i
s
e
d

 
e
v
’
I
 
y
h
w
 
s
’
t
a
h
T

 
l
l
’
e
w
 
r
e
v
o

 
s
’
t
i
 
r
e
t
f
a
 
,

n
i
w
 
e
w

 
f
i
 

n
e
v
e
 

d
n
a
 
,
r
a
W
 
a
 
s
i
 
s
i
h
t
 
,

d
i
a
s
 
I
 
s
A

 
t
o

l
 

 

a
n
e
t
t
o
g

 

e
v
’
I
 
.
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d
 
e
f
a
s
 
a
 
m
o
r
f
 
y
m
e
n
e
 
e
h
t
 
y
f
i
t
n
e
d
i
 
o
t
 
u
o
y

 
t
’
n
o
d

 
e
w
o
s
 

 

n
e
d
d
i
h

 

 
e
r
a
 
”
s
e
n
i
m
d
n
a
l
“
 
e
h
t
 
l
l
a
 
e
r
e
h
w
d
n
i
f
 

 

o
t
 

d
e
e
n

 
.
e
s
n
e
f
e
D

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m

t
r
a
p
e
D
 
e
h
t
 

m
o
r
f
 
t
s
e
r
e
t
n
i
 
f
o

 
.

 

 

e
c
a
f
 
r
u
o
n
i
 
f
f
o
o
g
 
m
i
h
 
e
v
a
h
d
n
a
 
e
n
o
n
o
p
e
t
s

 

 

 

 

Y
M
E
N
E

 

N
E
E
S
N
U

 

E
H
T

 

O
N

 

S
E
Y

 

S
E
Y

 
,
r
e
p
o
r
p

 
,
y
l
d
l
r
o
w
e
h
 
s
I

 

 

 
s
e
o
d
d
n
a
 
,
t
u
c
 
n
a
e
l
c

 

e
k
i
l
 
l
e
e
f
 
u
o
y
 
e
k
a
m
e
h

 

 
r
u
o
y
 
e
v
a
e
l
 

l

d
u
o
c
 
u
o
y

 

i

m
h
h
t
i

 

w

 
r
e
t
h
g
u
a
d

 

o
t
 
t
n
e
w
u
o
y
 
e
l
i

 

h
w

 

?
s
e
i
v
o
m
e
h
t

 

 

S
E
Y

 

e
k
i
l
 
e
h
 
s
e
o
D

 

?
o
h
C
 
t
e
r
a
g
r
a
M

 

O
N

 

O
N

 

g
n
i
r
a
e
w
e
h
 
s
I

 

 

?
p
u
e
k
a
m

 

O
N

 

S
E
Y

 

g
n
i
r
a
e
w
e
h
 
s
I

 

 

?
s
s
e
r
d
 
a

 

 
a
 
e
v
a
h
e
h
 
s
e
o
D

 

?
e
h
c
a
t
s
u
m

 

O
N

 

S
E
Y

 
t
h
g
i
a
r
t
s
 
o
s
 
,
r
a
f
 
o
S

 
.
y
a
g
 
t
o
n
 
r
a
f
 
o
S

 
”
k
e
e
r
G
“
 
t
s
u
J

 

S
E
Y

 
a
 
n

 

i
 
t
r
a
p
g
n
i
k
a
t
 
e
h
 
s
I

 

?
n
o
i
t
a
i
t
i
n

i
 
y
t
i
n
r
e
t
a
r
f

O
N

 

n

i
 

u
o
y
 
e
r
A

 

?
o
g
a
c
i
h
C

 

S
E
Y

 

S
E
Y

 

O
N

 
y
l
t
n
e
r
r
u
c
 
e
h
 
s
I

 

?
u
o
y
 
g
n
w
o
b

l

i

 

 

?
m
a
h
k
c
e
B
d
i
v
a
D
e
h
 
s
I

 

 

O
N

 

S
E
Y

 

O
N

 

e
h
 
s
e
o
D

 

?
g
n
i
r
r
a
e
n
a
 
e
v
a
h

 

 

O
N

 

S
E
Y

 

O
N

 

e
h
 
s
e
o
D

 

 
r
e
v
o
h
g
i
e
w

 

?
s
b

l
 

0
0
2

 

e
v
o
r
p
m

 

i
 
e
h
d
u
o
C

l

 
s
i
h
t
 
f
o
 
t
u
o
 
y
a
l
 
e
h
t

 

?
t
r
a
h
c
 
w
o
l
f

 

S
E
Y

S
E
Y

 

e
h
 
s
I

 

?
k
c
e
l
l
e
S
m
o
T

 

 

O
N

 

O
N

 

S
E
Y

 
t
i
 
y
a
S

 
.
r
e
d
u
o

l

 

O
N

 
a
 
e
k
a
t
 
e
h
d
D

i

 

 

?
u
o
y
 
t
a
 
g
n
w
s

i

 

S
E
Y

 

O
N

 

e
h
t
 
f
o
e
r
o
m

 

 
r
o
2

 

 

e
k
i
l
 
e
h
 
s
e
o
D

 

S
E
Y

 

?
g
n
w
o

i

l
l

o
f

 

o
n
h
c
e
T
•

 

 
s
r
e
t
a
W
n
h
o
J
 
•

 

 
x
e
S
 
y
a
G
•

 

 

O
N

 
y
a
s
 
u
o
y
 
n
e
h
W

 
”
,
r
a
e
b
 
y
l
r
u
b

 
,
i

H
“

 

n
r
u
t
 
e
h
 
s
e
o
d

 

?
d
a
e
h
 
s
i
h

 

S
E
Y

 
t
i
 
s
I

 

?
n
e
e
w
o

l
l
a
H

 

O
N

 

O
N

 

S
E
Y

 
r
o
t
c
a
 
n
a
 
e
h
 
s
I

 
y
t
i
l
a
n
o
s
r
e
p
V
T
 
r
o

 

 

?
k
r
o
w

 
t
a
 
y
l
t
n
e
r
r
u
c

 

S
E
Y

 
.

d
e
m
m
a
j
 
r
a
d
y
a
G

 
.
a
t
a
d
 
r
o
f
 
g
n
n
n
a
c
s
 
p
e
e
K

i

Y
A
G

 

T
O
N

u 
o
y
e
r
A

 

 

?
y
a
g

 

O
N

 

S
E
Y

y
a
G

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Examples of SG’s are Mr. Sulu, Doogie Howser, and this one other famous guy 

It’s not me. 

who’s about to gay surprise everybody. 

PASTE OTHER GUY 

HERE WHEN HE 

GAY SURPRISES US 

SO HOW DID THIS HAPPEN? 

Where did all these “The Gays” come from? 

Well, there are those who argue that some people are born gay. But this is 

just silly, because we are made in God’s image. So if someone were born gay, 

that would mean God is part gay, and he is definitely not. He is 100% hetero. 

God is all Man. 

And I can prove it. 

BIBLICAL ACTS THAT PROVE GOD IS NOT GAY 

It’s Amen— 
NOT “Ah, men.” 

It’s not “Hail Larry, 
Full of Grace.” 

CREATED MAN AND WOMAN: Took one of Adam’s ribs and made  

Eve. If God were gay, he would have turned Adam’s rib into Dermot  

Mulroney. 
DESTROYED THE CITY OF SODOM: He didn’t rent a summer   
cottage there, he destroyed it! 
HE TURNED MOSES’ “STAFF” INTO A “SERPENT”: If he was 

gay, it’d be the other way around. 

And it’s not “Our 
Father who art in 
Kevin.” 

TURNED WATER INTO WINE: Not Appletinis. Not Cosmos. God 

likes his booze straight and served from an animal skin. 

So I think we can put to bed this crazy idea that God is gay. 

Okay, I’m gonna roust it for a second because I think it bears repeating. He’s 

Hetero sleep 

not gay. Back to sleep, idea. 

And He certainly doesn’t believe in Gay Marriage. The institution of marriage is 

meant for a man and a woman. It’s right there in the Bible, right after God tells 

everyone to stone the gays. Nowhere does God say he wants pairs of men to be 

fruitful and multiply. If that’s what He’d wanted, He would have given gay men 

ovaries and breasts and luscious lips. But he only gave them the luscious lips. 

•  

 

•  

•  

•  

112 

H O M O S E X U A L S  

AND YET… 
The  biggest  threat  facing  America  today—next  to  socialized  medicine,  the   
Dyson vacuum cleaner, and the recumbent bicycle—is Gay Marriage. 

It’s like the Red Coats, Green Peace, and the Yellow Peril combined.  

I call it The Lavender Armageddon. And it is the biggest threat facing America  
today. (See above.) 

Now, the Man-Hugger huggers out there are saying, “Mary, please! What about  
the Iraq War? Surely that’s a bigger threat than Gay Marriage.” Yes, Iraq is the  
Central Front in the War on Terror© and We’re Fighting Them Over There So  
We Don’t Have to Fight Them Over Here.™ But consider this: who, other than  
terrorists, wants to destroy our way of life? The Gays. Allowing them to marry  
would be like strapping on a suicide vest with a matching cummerbund.1 

They say this. 

When I married my wife she became Mrs. Stephen Colbert. Likewise, I became  
Mr.  Stephen  Colbert.  We  went  from  being  two  autonomous  individuals  to  a   
team whose sole focus was winning the game of life. By winning, of course,  
I mean procreation. And we have won! We have procreated. And I mean no  
disrespect to those readers who have not had children. There is no shame in  
being a genetic dead end.  

Now marriage involves a lot of sacrifice. For instance, my wife frowns on me  
having sex with anyone but her. If marriage is suddenly available to everyone,  
I’m not sure I want to make those sacrifices. I guess it’s like that wise old joke:  
I don’t want to belong to any club that would have gay people as a member.2 

At one time (I believe it was 1952), acceptance of the gay lifestyle was so low  
that there were exactly two homosexuals in the continental United States. One  
was male, and one was female, so they never tried to get married. But today  
tolerance  is  at  a  dangerous  level,  and  if  it  keeps  increasing  at  current  rates,   
everyone will gay marry, and our grandchildren’s grandchildren may never be  
born. Or worse. 

They’ll be gay adopted.3 

Dinosaurs are 
extinct and more 
popular than ever! 

1  Yes, gays, I know: it’s vest or cummerbund.  Now do you see my point? 
2  Here’s another oldie but goodie: Q: Why did the gay fireman wear red suspenders? 

A: He didn’t. He wanted his pants to fall down. 

3  A quick word about gay children. And by that I mean “children of gays” rather than “children who are gay.” 
I don’t believe someone can choose to be gay until they’ve experienced either college or The Rocky Horror 
Picture Show, whichever comes first. 

113 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  FO R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

My name is Austin, and I am a reformed homosexual. 
I was only six years old the first time I chose to pervert nature.  
I was with my mother at the bike store, and I decided to feel a  
thrill of excitement when I noticed a shiny purple Schwinn with  
plastic flowers on the basket. 

From that point on, I chose to feel different from the other 

boys in my class. Until the age of twelve, I merely elected to feel 

a vague sense of not quite fitting in. But then, when puberty hit, 

Austin, 
a formerly gay man 

I resolved to be alienated from and picked on by male peers. 

I kept up this sinful pattern well into my twenties. I chose 

the urges that made my father stop talking to me; I selected 

the longings that led a group of morally stronger men to beat me up in a parking lot; I 

even picked the sense of contentment I felt during a three-year live-in relationship with 

an older man. But all that time, I knew I was living against God’s will. And so, I tried 

everything I could think of to turn straight. 

I went on dates with women. I joined a fantasy sports league. I changed the shape of 

my mustache. 

Nothing. 

called “chickpeas.” 

the true path of love. 

I even tried hormone therapy to raise my testosterone levels. All this did was make 

me go fat and bald, which, in addition to my pale skin and short stature, turned me into 

what’s known in the gay community as a “garbanzo bean.” In lesbian circles they’re 

Then one day at Hot Yoga, I saw a flier on the Community Board about a gay 

rehabilitation group called God Also Yearns. They teach that God desires us to accept 

I took the plunge and entered their proven three-part program.

 

 

 

• Accept the authority of your spiritual counselors: They not only condemned my 

wicked acts, but also sternly judged my clothing and income level.

• Admit your sins: To purge them, I wrote them down. It became a very popular blog.

• Submit to a higher power: This consisted mostly of electroshock. 

The God Also Yearns counselors said I could be completely cured if I attended 

their four-week rehabilitation camp. I could only afford a two-week course. They said 

that would also do the trick. 

They were right. At the camp, I joined in healing acts of Christian heterosexual 

fellowship such as heterosexual cookouts and heterosexual trust falls. The highlight 

of the two weeks was performing in the camp’s traditional-values version of Rent, 

called Lent. I played Wally, the Republican Senator who casts the deciding vote for 

the Marriage Protection Amendment. I’ve never clogged with such passion. 

My God Also Yearns counselors taught me that homosexuality is an addiction like 

smoking, only you can still do it on an airplane. To quit you have to go Cold Turkey, 

by imagining that your homosexual partner is a slimy, puckered, cold turkey. Unless 

you’re into “cold turkeys,” in which case you definitely need the four-week course. 

Today, I am married to a wonderful woman, Afke. I don’t hide my shameful past 

from her. During the physical act of love I will often talk about it just to remind us 

both how much better it is with a girl. 

I also call in to a number of radio shows. 

I hope my story is inspiring to any homosexuals who have bought this book not 

to read, but to carry as a signal to other homosexuals that they are willing to be 

approached and seduced. This book’s distinctive cover would make it exceptionally 

good for that, but take it from me: there is another choice. 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

THE FINAL THREAT 

“The greatest trick the devil ever played was 

convincing the world that he did not exist.” 

—Charles Baudelaire, French poet, and I’m going to go out on a limb here and say “gay guy” 

As gay people are increasingly integrated into society and accepted as friends 

and coworkers, there is a new threat looming on the horizon. 

The threat that we will forget to feel threatened by them. 

On this final battlefield, the greatest casualty of all may be our anger. 

TAKE SOME ACTION! 

anger against the gays. 

There are three simple steps you can take today to maintain your 

Next time you get cut off in traffic, say to yourself,  
“I bet that guy is gay.” 

Picture your wife cheating on you with a gay guy. 

Go to the bathroom when everyone else in the house is asleep, 

look straight at the guy in the mirror, and whisper, “You’re gay.” 

If he nods, you will get angry. 

•  

•  

•  

116 

FUN     ZONE

THE HOMOSEXUAL AGENDA

There are two things we know for sure about gays. One: they are neat and organized. 

And two: they are out to destroy our society. Know thine enemy by correctly numbering 

the top ten goals of the gay agenda in order of the gays’ priorities.

 A. ADOPT YOUR CHILDREN

 F. MARRY ON YOUR FRONT LAWN

 B. MAKE YOU TUCK IN YOUR SHIRT

 G. INFILTRATE THE CLERGY

 C. TURN YOU GAY

 H. DRESS UP PUG FOR HALLOWEEN

 D. OKLAHOMA! 

 I. GAY IT UP

 E. BEACH VOLLEYBALL

 J. SODOMIZE OHIOANS

fig 10. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C H APT ER  8  

HI GH E R  EDUCATI ON 

“Teach your children well.”
 –David Crosby, bloated folk singer 
& notorious lesbian inseminator 

IF 

THERE’S A BIGGER CONTRIBUTOR TO 

LEFT-WING ELITIST BRAINWASHING 

THAN COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES, 

I’D LIKE TO SEE IT. THERE’S AN OLD 

Figure of speech. 
Don’t show it to me. 

SAYING, “A LITTLE KNOWLEDGE IS A DANGEROUS THING.” 

WHICH MEANS A LOT OF KNOWLEDGE MUST BE A REALLY 

DANGEROUS THING. AND IT IS. LOOK NO FURTHER THAN 

the example of Ted Kaczynski, a.k.a. the Unabomber. He skipped sixth 

grade,  got  a  Bachelor’s  from  Harvard  followed  by  a  Master’s  and  a  Ph.D., 

and then embarked on a distinguished academic career of blowing people up. 

Most Ph.D. biographies have similar endings. 

Ted Kaczynski’s last job before he went into full-time Unabombing? Assistant 

Professor  of  Mathematics  at  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  a.k.a. 

University of Blame America First, Berkeley. Yes, folks, he capped off all those 

years of being a student by becoming a professor. Let’s face it—he’d have been 

crazy not to go crazy, which only proves my point: the greatest threat facing 

America  today—outside  of  flag  burning,  yoga,  and  vaccination—is  higher 

education. 

Hey Docs! How about 
a vaccine against 
yoga? 

119 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Just  exactly  what  makes  colleges  so  dangerous?  It’s  the  fact  that  their 
classrooms and lecture halls are filled with a poison known as New Ideas. 

Racism, genocide, 
and bears were all  
once New Ideas. 

Unhappy kids 
can skip this part. 

New Ideas hurt Americans in two ways: 

THE EMOTIONAL COST 

Because you didn’t know anything. 

The more you know, the sadder you get. 

Let me ask you this: why were you happier were when you were a kid? 

Don’t Believe Me? By the time you finish reading this chapter, over a hundred 

dogs and cats in animal shelters around the nation will have been euthanized.

Don’t know if 
this is true 

Bet you wish you could erase that knowledge. But it’s too late. You learned a 

New Idea, and it made you sad. College is just more of the same. 

THE PHYSICAL COST 

Pain is the body’s way of telling the brain it’s in trouble. Similarly, confusion is 

the brain’s way of telling the body, “All right, buddy, drop that book.” 

Let’s try a little experiment. Look at this equation: 

-b+  bB - 4ac
2a 
What you’re feeling right now is your body rejecting an idea that is trying to 

X= 

-

make you learn it. Don’t fight the confusion. That’s just your mind scabbing 

over in a desperate attempt to protect you from that unnatural co-mingling of 

Numbers and letters?  numbers and letters up there. You can’t add it, and you can’t read it. Useless. 
That’s a “Catch-22!” 

GUT-CHECK: 

Son of Sam killer David Berkowitz was a well-adjusted 

member of society until his neighbor’s dog started filling his head with 

a bunch of New Ideas. 

While it’s true that you encounter New Ideas in colleges and universities, they 

aren’t the real problem. Some of the buildings are nice, and the lawns are quite 

lush. It’s what infests these hives of higher learning that is the source of the 

Writing fans: Watch 
for this bee metaphor 
to reappear later! 

real poison. 

120 

H I G H E R   E D U C A  T I O N  

I’m talking about Academics. 

Not a day goes by without a news of some anti-American statement made by a 

lunatic in a mortar board and elbow patches. 

HERE’S A QUESTION: Elbow patches? Just what are these lecherous 

lecturers doing behind their lecterns that wears out their elbows so fast? 

I’ve got twenty-year-old suits, and the elbows are pristine. 

Why  can’t  we  fire  these  “edu-bators”?  These  men  and  (all  too  frequently)  “edu-bator” 

women who actually give credit for learning a foreign language?  Because of  2007 

©Stephen Colbert 

a  little  thing  called  tenure.  Well,  I  have  a  modest  proposal  for  changing  all 

that.  Doctors  don’t  get  tenure.  Plumbers  don’t.  Can  you  imagine  if  baseball 

players got tenure, and we had to sit there watching them round the bases in 

a wheelchair? 

I propose that we do away with tenure on campus once and for all and replace it 

with a series of clear-cut requirements for professors. In no particular order: 

I can imagine this. 

Actually, in this 
particular order. 

Cognitive skills test: Prospective faculty can demonstrate mental  
competence by memorizing a small passage of text, say, a secret   
loyalty oath. 

 

U.S. History: Name the winner of the 1943 World Series. I got this  

idea from an old World War II movie about a squadron that had been   I may have dreamt it. 

infiltrated by a spy. I can’t actually answer this question myself, but  

I’m not the one whose patriotism is in question. 
Penmanship: Can a professor legibly write a brief paragraph?  
For instance, a secret loyalty oath? 
Eat a bug: Prove you love your country as much as the contestants 
on Fear Factor. 
Public speaking: Can the faculty member enunciate the secret  
loyalty oath when they are called upon to do so by a tribunal? 
Good-faith attempts at heterosexuality: Prospective professors  
would be required to produce evidence of at least five years’ worth  
of heterosexual congress. (I’m open-minded. I don’t say you must be   
straight to teach our youth. I only ask that you try.) 

121 

• 

 
• 

• 

• 
 
• 

• 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

It involves a glass rod 
and a hammer! 

upon them? 

• 

 
• 

Loyalty: If they fell into enemy hands, could the professor keep 

the loyalty oath secret? No matter what unspeakable act be visited 

Essay: Why Ayn Rand would thrash Shakespeare in a fair fight. This  

isn’t a metaphor for the disparity in the receptions afforded their  

differing philosophies in today’s left-leaning universities. Professors  

would be required to describe how she’d kick his ass in a bar. 

FROM BAD TO WORDS 

Told you it was
 coming back 

The easiest way for college professor “bees” to administer their “idea poison”

is through their “thought-stingers,” commonly called “books.” 

WAKEUP CALL: Think books aren’t scary? Well, think about this: 

You can’t spell “Book” without “Boo!” 

The  only  good  book  is  the  Good  Book.  Come  on,  the  word  “Good”  is  right 

there in the title. And if there’s one thing you can learn from the Bible, it’s that 

books are responsible for the Fall of Man. Look at the story of Adam and Eve. 

Their lives were pretty great—until they ate fruit from the Tree of Knowledge. 

Now, you don’t have to be a biblical scholar to see that the fruit clearly repre-

sents  a  book.  First,  both  come  from  a  tree.  Second,  if  my  first  point  didn’t 

convince you, I’m not going to waste my breath with another. 

God’s point: Ignorance isn’t just bliss, it’s Paradise. 

Unfortunately, Paradise is Lost, and Ignorance may no longer be an option. The 

Sad Truth is Knowledge has become a racket, and these days it’s nearly impos-

sible for the uneducated to break into the world of highly paid professionals. 

Doctors and lawyers (even some dentists) have to go college. So to live in the 

gated communities to which you’d like to become accustomed, you’ve got to 

play ball. College Ball. 

122 

H I G H E R   E D U C A  T I O N  

GETTING IN 

called cachet. 

First off, if you’re going to squander your youth in the Ivory Jungle, at least 

shoot  for  the  Top  Schools.  They  provide  something  the  best  firms  look  for, 

Rule of Thumb: If they’re not in the first two pages of U.S. News and World 

Report  College  Guide,  all  they  offer  is  information  and  the  possibility  of 

drunken sex with your suitemate—a dangerous potential that will gnaw at you 

for the rest of your life. 

The ultimate goal of going to a Top School is the quiet satisfaction of whipping 

out your Alma Mater at opportune moments. At first blush, most would peg me 

as an average Joe, and I’m proud of that. But my sheepskin announces to all 

assembled that though I may be a man of the people, I also have the keys to the 

clubhouse. I can’t count the number of times I’ve heard the phrase, “You went 

Note: The “t” is silent.  
Classy. 

Did your suitemate 
gnaw on you? 

to Dartmouth? I find that hard to believe.” 

THE BAD NEWS 

Heard it while at 
Dartmouth,  too 

Admissions is an arbitrary and demoralizing process, and no matter how hard 

you  work,  the  outcome  is  often  determined  by  personal  connections.  You 

know what else is like that? 

Life. 

THE GOOD NEWS 

Also, love-tester machines. No way I’m a “Cold Fish.” 

I’m at least a 
“Pretty Spicy.” 

There’s an entire industry in this country devoted to getting kids into college. 

And while you may not need Kaplan’s or The Princeton Review to get into a 

decent school, you should pay for them anyway. We live in a capitalist society. 

Love it or leave it. 

Applying  to  college  teaches  youngsters  résumé-building,  a.k.a.:  lying.  Here’s 

how it works, kids. Let’s say one day you’re bored in class, so to pass the time, 
you make out with the Danish exchange student across the aisle. Now, on your  “Hands” Christian 
college application, you can say that you carried out an Independent Study in 

Andersen 

Foreign Tongues. 

123 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

BY THE NUMBERS: Even the least-padded résumé can be overcome with 

I went to Dartmouth. 

a solid application essay. Here’s the one that got me into Dartmouth: 

124 

H I G H E R   E D U C A  T I O N  

There are two secrets that make this essay great. 

Secret number one: A Thesaurus. Eggheads love the words, so the more you 

jam in there, the better. Think of it as a verb sausage. 

Secret number two: The last sentence. All it takes is a little research, and you 

can find the campus library, dormitory, or stadium that most plausibly could 

have been donated by your family. You’d be surprised how rarely these folks 

check into your background if you show up to the interview wearing an ascot. 

CHASE CUTTING: You got in! Feel good? It should. You were deemed worthy, 

while your high school rival is going to his safety school. 

Baghdad State 

NOW WHAT? 

When you get to college you’ll be on your own, maybe for the first time in your 

life. You will soon learn that peer pressure is a terrible thing. You’re going to be 

tempted to go follow the crowd—into a classroom. Fight it. Because there’s no 

need to attend a single lecture. 

Don’t believe me? Professor Colbert is going to tell you all you need to know. 

You’re about to get four years’ worth of college in five minutes. I went through 

the course catalogue for a prestigious university—I won’t say which, because 

I might have a shot at an honorary doctorate there—and I found that I could 

reduce the pertinent content of every class into one sentence. I didn’t include 

graduate classes, because if you’re even considering an advanced degree, I’ve 

already lost you. 

125 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

C LIT 211 

LITERATURE AND CULTURE 

C LIT 314 

THE NORTHERN EUROPEAN BALLAD 

C LIT 342 

LITERATURE OF PACIFIC ISLANDERS 

DANCE 306 

DANCE FOR MEN 

DRAMA 101 

INTRODUCTION TO THE THEATRE 

ENG 324 

CAREERS IN POETRY 

CSE 322 

INTRODUCTION TO FORMAL MODELS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE 

ETHN 384 

INTERRACIAL DYNAMICS BETWEEN WOMEN OF COLOR 

H ART 331

 NATIVE ART OF THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST COAST 

PHIL 101 

INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY 

PHIL 356 

INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 

PSYCH 101 

INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGY 

REL 212 

COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

REL 308 

INTRODUCTION TO ISLAM 

SCI 252 

INSECT BEHAVIOR 

SOC 360 

ETHNIC STEREOTYPES AND THE HUMOR OF CRUELTY 

C HIS 416 

20TH CENTURY MEXICAN SOCIAL MOVEMENTS 

WOMEN 357 

WOMEN ON WOMEN: THE LITERATURE OF LIBERATION. 

126 

H I G H E R   E D U C A  T I O N  

Now you that you have your education covered, what will you do with all that 

free time? Well, luckily, college is good for one thing. Can you guess what it is? 

I’ll give you a hint: it starts with “secret” and ends with “societies.” 

Whether  they  be  Fraternities  or  Eating  Clubs  or  (in  Louisiana)  Parishes, 

universities are the best places a young man can meet and bond with, through 

an elaborate hazing process, those who can give him a leg up for the rest of 

his life. 

turntable. 

I cemented my lasting relationships with America’s future movers and shakers 

by being forced to strip naked with half my fellow pledges and pass a greased 

45  rpm  record  of  Foreigner’s  “Hot  Blooded”  from  ass  crack  to  ass  crack.  It 

could have been worse. The other half of the pledges were passing a greased 

Still played post-crack. 
Let’s see an MP3 
do that. 

In your face, 
whoever’s 
in charge of China! 

Don’t believe me? While most of his peers at Yale were writing essays about 

the tension between stasis and dynamism in Mariana in the Moated Grange, 

young George W. Bush was making the connections that would eventually lead 

to him becoming the most Powerful Man in the World.™ 

I speak, of course, of Skull and Bones, a shadowy organization that admits 

only  the  most  deserving  Yalesmen.  Its  members  swear  an  oath  of  secrecy, 

and use their wealth and access to power to promote one another once they 

graduate into the “real world.” For well over a century, Skull and Bones has 

provided  a  safe  and  brotherly  environment  where  future  Supreme  Court 

Justices,  Presidents,  and  Captains  of  Industry  can  gather  to  urinate  on 

Geronimo’s bones. 

THE TAKEAWAY: Contrary to what you’ll be taught in college, evolution 

is a farce, but Darwin did have one good idea: Social Darwinism. You see, 

in the animal kingdom, God grants long life to whichever lion He thinks is 

prettiest. But in the world of human society, only the strongest, boldest, 

and worthiest individuals have the most sex, get the most power, and live 

the longest. College is the place to meet those people, and once you do, 

find out their darkest secret. 

It may come in handy some day. 

It probably involves 
their suitemate…and 
some New Ideas! 

127 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  FO R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

March the 13th, this two thousand and seventh year of what 

some may consider Our Lord. 

I am Doctor Bernard Brunner, distinguished professor at 

a well-known and esteemed liberal arts university. Some may 

query, “Of what are you scholarly?” Tragically, even I am not 

quite certain of that which is my endeavor. It ends in –ology?  

I am certain only of this—that life is fleeting and that much 

of my own has been wasted within the confines of small rooms 

Doctor Bernard Brunner 
Distinguished Professor 

and even smaller minds. I have spooled the thread of my life 

arguing meaningless rhetorical questions with unformed, 

untried brains and vainly pressing nimble, young flesh into service. 

Oh, to feel the biting wind on my face. To wake in the early, still dark morn and milk 

a barn full of swelled cows. Or perhaps to live in the rough city, grasping steel work 

parts in my hard-calloused hands, the merit badge of the working man! 

But alack, harsh fate has decreed that none of these paths will be mine. For I have 

tenure, and she is far too comforting a mistress to loose me from her grasp for long. 

I lay in her arms and suck from her teat, fat and oily. 

And here I sit. And here I shall sit. 

And like a sneaky merman singing on the rocks, I try to lure young sailors away 

from the charted waters to a harsh and certain doom. Plug your ears, and though you 

be young, be wise! Listen not to me, and distrust me upon first sight! I will trap you in 

the learnings of the past. Look to the future! Away! Good sea!   

You must live to learn. Pray live. Whilst I, like all unnecessary things, do but 

shrivel… 

Dry out… And turn to dust. 

With the most sincere of wishes, 

Dr. Bernard Brunner, Ph.D. 

FUN 

ZONE 

Name The Aca-demon Lurking Behind The Beard 

1

 Ted Kaczynski         

2 Gloria Steinem 

3 Charlie Manson 

4 Evil Spock 

a 

b 

c 

d 

HINTS 
1. He led a small coven of fanatical followers who 
called themselves “The Family.” Often called the 
“Fifth Beatle.” 

2. Has led a large coven of fanatical followers 
who called themselves “The Lesbians.” I had a 
three-way with her and Jane Fonda. 

3. His cold logic, or “book-thinking,” masks a 
sociopathic indifference to human emotion. 
Bonus Hint: he tortured the mirror-world version 
of Mr. Chekhov in an “agony booth” in “Mirror, 
Mirror” (episode #33, original airdate 10/6/67). 

4. Enjoyed blowing people up through the mail. 

fig 11. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C H APT ER  9  

H OL LY WO OD 

“Those Hollywood nights, those Hollywood Hills.”
 –Bob Seger, Rocker Laureate of General Motors 

NOTHING 

CAN  MATCH  THE  EXHILARATION 

OF  SETTLING  INTO  YOUR  SEAT  IN 

A  DARK  MOVIE  THEATER,  HEADY 

WITH  ANTICIPATION.  THE  SCREEN 

LIGHTS  UP!  FINALLY,  THERE  IT  IS:  THE  FIRST  PRE-

TRAILER  ADVERTISEMENT.  WILL  THE  HERO  BE  ABLE  TO 

DODGE  THE  MYRIAD  OBSTACLES  ON  HIS  WAY  TO  THE 

Pepsi machine? Will the girl-next-door fall for the arrogant pretty-boy with the 

substandard wireless service or the lovable goof with America’s most reliable 

network, Verizon? That’s what they call the “magic” of the big screen. Bravo! 

Then the feature starts and the evening quickly turns 

sour.  Within  minutes,  you  find  yourself  ushering 

your children out the exit while you desperately try 

to explain to them that God is not Black. 

I  DON’T  UNDERSTAND  movies  today.  They 

romanticize the liberal lifestyle, cram gays into our 

living rooms, and make children believe it’s safe to 

spend time with Robin Williams. 

TOO FAR! 

Mrs. Doubtfire should 
be both doubted and 
fired. 

131 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Let’s face it, next to hybrid vehicles, anchor babies, and heirloom tomatoes, 

there’s nothing in America quite as corrosive as our so-called “Entertainment” 

Industry. 

CULTURAL CORROSIVENESS PH SCALE 

Increasing Acidity 

Neutral 

Increasing Alkalinity 

1  Entertainment Industry 

2  Infotainment Industry 

2.4  Vinegar 

3  Cultural Relativism/Mint Jelly 

4  Mesquite Flavor 

4.5  Welfare/Tomato Juice 

5  Gossip 

6  Juicy Gossip 

6.5  Milk 

7  Milquetoast 

8  Arts and Crafts Furniture 

9  Etiquette/Hand Soap 

10  Milk of Magnesia 

11  Good Breeding 

12  Bleach 

13  Abstinence 

14  Holy Water 

Don’t  believe  me?  Even  my  editor,  Gayle,  has  pressured  me  to  make  this 

book “entertaining”! But I don’t play that game.1 

This chapter isn’t going to transport you to a glamorous world of magic where 

wishes come true and even sociopaths like Jason Bateman can become the 

slam-dunking lupine beasts of their dreams. 

No, this is a runaway train to Cold, Hard Realityville. 

First  stop,  the  Good  Old  Days,  because  while  there’s  nothing  more  anti-

American than Hollywood today, there was nothing more All-American than 

Hollywood yesterday. 

132  1 Other games I don’t play: Boggle, Scrabble, Scatagories, travel Yahtzee.2 

2 I will play the stationary version of Yahtzee in a vehicle, but only if the vehicle is parked and/or docked. 

H O L L  Y W O O D  

NEWS ON THE MARCH! 

The Time: The 1930s. 
The Scene: Hollywood!  
Fresh-faced hopefuls from around the nation stream to Los Angeles  
with dreams of becoming the next “Steamboat Willie.”  

THAT’S  RIGHT:  There  was  once  a  “Golden  Age”  of  Hollywood.  It  was  so-

called because the original studio heads were the children of gold prospectors 

who settled in California, struck it rich, and then converted to Judaism. 

Back  then,  movies  worked.  Whether  they  were  “talkies,”  “soundies,”  or  the 

short-lived “loudies,” the films of the Golden Age had one thing in common 

that made them timeless classics: corporate hegemony. From the crank on the 

cameras to the films’ shipping canisters to the dusty hat on the wrinkled old 

usher with the air of defeat, the “Big Five” studios owned every dimension of 

moviemaking. They even owned the stars. 

Studios  would  pluck  promising  young  actors  from  obscurity,  and  with  a 

simple  name  change  and  an  ironclad  lifetime  contract  larded  with  morality 

Elsewhere: Nazis! 

The first film editors were 
moyels. 

clauses,  turn  them  into  Hollywood  legends. 

Actors  like  Joan  Crawford  (born  Shprintzel 

Anatevkawitz) and Cary Grant (born Balgok-

Uth,  Devourer  of  Souls)  got  more  than  just 

starring  roles  in  the  hit  movies  of  their  day. 

They got firm moral guidance. Women could 

not  appear  in  public  without  their  makeup. 

Homosexual  men  could  not  appear  without 

their  “beards.”  Beardless  heterosexual  men 

could not appear without their “mustaches.” 

Exhibit A 

133 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Here’s  a  handy  chart  of  the  Big  Five  studios.  If  you  don’t  find  it  handy,  try 

holding the book in your other hand. (See “How to Read This Book.”) 

THE STUDIO SYSTEM 

Studio 

Early Strength 

Razzmatazz 

Buck-toothed 
manservants 

Moxie 

Realistic 
hobo bindles 

“Remarkable 
verisimilitude in 
its depiction of 
the appearance 
and customs of 
the fierce Indian 
Squaw!” 

Golden Age 
Classic 

Love Comes to 
Football Town 
(1948) 

The Jumpy 
Negro (1927) 

Rin Tin Tin Goes 
to Washington 
(1932) 

$top That Train 
o’ Dollar$! 
(1938) 

What a Dame! 
(1936) 

Sign of Decline 

Lion no 
longer devoured 
Japanese baby 
during studio 
title card 

None. Proud 
subsidiary of 
Viacom. Keep 
those hits 
coming! 

Happy Feet 
(2006). I don’t 
want to feel any 
guiltier than I 
already do about 
eating penguins. 

Bought by tire 
company. 

No longer 
20th century. 

134 

H O L L  Y W O O D  

As you can see, for a while, everything was dandy-dory in “The City of Angels.” 

But  guess  who  shows  up  to  crash  the  party  and  ruin  it?  You  guessed  it— 

The Supreme Court. 

Did you guess it?

 Yes
No 

(Cut along line and 
keep in wallet) 

On May 4, 1948, the Supreme Court ruled that the Big Five studios had violated 

U.S. antitrust laws and set off a process that led to their dissolution. Ten days 

later, the State of Israel was proclaimed. Coincidence? 

I believe so. 

ONCE  AGAIN:  The  old  adage  proved  true:  “The  Supreme  Court  hates 

America.”  Suddenly,  it  was  no  longer  okay  for  studios  to  force  their  female 

leads to take diet pills or copulate with rams. 

And talk about hypocrisy! In 1952, the Supreme Court made another “ruling.” 

This time, it was that movies were protected by the First Amendment! That’s 

right,  just  four  years  after  they  criminalized  Hollywood’s  free  market,  they 

upheld Hollywood’s free speech! Which is it, Supreme Court? Are “free” things 

Ewe! 

I thought “rulings” 
were for kings! 

good or bad? 

you couldn’t. 

Tragically, the 1952 First Amendment decision all but killed off the Production 

Code, the industry’s guidelines for keeping movies moral. It was like the Bill of 

Rights, only for movies, and instead of saying what you could do, it said what 

THE PRODUCTION CODE: 
SO LONG, FAREWELL, AUFWIEDERSEHEN, GOODBYE 
The  Motion  Picture  Production  Code  of  1930,  often  called  the  “Hays  Code” 

because that’s what it forbade onscreen couples from rolling in, was a strict set 

of guidelines meant to ensure that motion pictures set a positive example. It 

was created to curb the corrupting influence of movies like The Bathing Kuties 

of ’28 and Gangbang Dames of ’29. The Code took effect on March 31, 1930, 

five months too late to prevent the Wall Street Crash, but early enough to keep 

The Sixties from happening until approximately 1964. The Hays Code is gone 

now, but a look back at some of its clauses shows how much we have lost. 

Cut Rolf some slack! 

When America 
fell victim to the 
British Invasion 

135 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

CODE OF CONDUCT (cont.) 

657. A man and a woman must never be shown lying in the same bed, unless it has  
been previously established that one of them is dead. 

658. Lascivious dancing shall be prohibited unless it is performed by dusky  
native girls. Dusky native girls shall be prohibited unless they are portrayed  
by white actresses. 

659. Cannibalism shall not be portrayed or implied, unless hunger first drives 
the  cannibalistic  character  to  visualize  his  victim  as  an  enormous  roast 
chicken. 

660. Seduction and rape are never proper subjects for comedy. Copping a feel 
shall be considered on a case-by-case basis. 

661. Characters may not walk and chew gum at the same time. 

662. Scenes of childbirth, in fact or in silhouette, are never to be presented.  
The same restriction applies to rabbits being pulled from hats. 

663. If a character places a folded towel over a second character's eyes and  
then invites him to do a sit-up while a third character removes his pants and  
squats in such a manner that the sit-up will bring the second character's nose  
into contact with the third character's naked nether sphincter, this action  
must  be  followed  by  a  fourth  character,  preferably  a  member  of  the  clergy, 
expressing disapproval. 

664. Characters must never discuss the high suicide rate among dentists in a  
manner that implies they “have it coming.” 

665. If a scene includes a train entering a tunnel, the tunnel shall not be  
portrayed as enjoying it. 

667. Should it be necessary to the story for a character to burp, sneeze and  
pass gas at the same time, the action must result in death. 

668. If the story calls for an animal character such as Lassie or Rin Tin Tin  
to save a child’s life, the reward may not be “a free ride on Timmy's leg.” 

670. For Christ's sake, somebody put a bra on Jean Harlow. 

136 

H O L L  Y W O O D  

By  1968,  the  Production  Code  was  no  more.  But,  sorry  Supreme  Court,  its 

death wasn’t excessive, lustful, or perverted. 

Fittingly, it went out 
without a “bang.” 

FUN FACT: If we still had the Hays Code, they could never have 

made The DaVinci Code! 

For  your  moral  convenience,  you  can  use  this  book  as  an  improvised 

Production Code. 

CUT 
HERE 

Don’t cut here 

Just cut along the line and watch movies made after 1968 through the hole. 

Move the page around to avoid objectionable content. For instance, focus on 

the actors’ faces, especially during sex scenes. 

Be careful not to 
mistake Russell Crowe’s 
ass for his face. 

137 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

A WORD ON CENSORSHIP: The creative class says it’s unconstitutional, 

but I advocate censorship. It’s my First Amendment right to do so. They 

want you to believe censorship hinders creativity. Hogwash. Just the 

opposite! Take foul language. It’s easy for a lazy screenwriter to put the 

words “fuck you, cocksucker” into a character’s mouth, but the artist who 

translates that phrase for an airing on prime time television or a transcon-

tinental flight is forced to come up with the much more interesting “flip 

you, cod bucket!” I ask you, which is more “creative”? 

NEWS ON THE MARCH! 

The Time: The 1950s. America loves Ike! 

The scene: Washington! Cheese-fed senators from the Heartland 

lead a desperate fight to keep Communist sympathizers from writing 

“I Remember Mama.” 

Luckily, the Golden Age of Hollywood was followed by an even Goldener Age, 

the Age of the Blacklist. Patriotic Americans secretly denounced Hollywood’s 

most dangerous Fellow Travellers to America’s House Un-American Activities 

Committee, led by American hero Joe McCarthy. America. 

MY TURN: One of my greatest regrets is that I never got the opportunity to 

“name  names.”  And  I  would  have  named  enough  names  to  fill  the  Moscow 

phone book. 

Luckily, I do have the opportunity to rename some names that were named 

all those years ago. So, here they are, a collection of blacklisted Hollywood 

comrades who were stopped from destroying our nation right in the nick of 

time. Most of the charges never added up to anything more than whispers and 

innuendo,  but  in  Hollywood,  whispers  and  innuendo  are  accepted  as  truth. 

Tried without a jury 

If you don’t believe me, ask Richard Gere’s gerbil. 

138 

H O L L  Y W O O D  

AMERICA-HATERS WHO WERE BROUGHT TO 
JUSTICE BY THE HUAC BLACKLIST 

Burl Ives 
Seems “Sam the 
Snowman” was 
actually “Pietrov the 
Pinko.” Say, what 
color was Rudolph’s 
nose anyway? 
3 
Exactly. 

The 

E.Y. “Yip” 
Harburg 
Lyricist for 
Wizard of Oz
. Pay 
no attention to the 
man behind the Iron 
Curtain. Lollipop 
Guild? Socialism for 
suckers. 

Bill Melendez 
He produced more 
than 75 “Peanuts” 
specials, but he 
It’s 
forgot one: 
Treason, Charlie 
Brown! 

Kim Hunter 
It’s a bitter pill to 
swallow, but Dr. 
Zira wasn’t only an 
evolutionist—she 
was a communist. 
Or am I being 
redundant? 

David Robison 
When I remember 
that episodes of 
Bewitched were 
written by a Red, 
I shudder to think 
how close I came 
to naming my son 
Uncle Arthur. 

Judy Holliday 
“Bells Are Ringing?” 
Yes,  Ms. Holiday. 
It’s Joe McCarthy. 
He’d like to ask you 
a few questions. 
He wasn’t “Born 
Yesterday!” 

Bill Scott 
Is it really a surprise 
that the voice of 
Mr. Peabody was a 
Commie? Or is there 
some other political 
system that lets 
dogs keep humans 
as pets? 

Larry Adler 
Hard to believe 
that the grasping 
claws of the Red 
Menace could 
even reach this 
harmonica virtuoso. 
Even harder to 
believe there’s 
such a phrase 
as “harmonica 
virtuoso.” 

3  I don’t want to be too hard on Burl. He eventually came around and testified to HUAC, turning in 

139 

Pete Seeger. “If I Had A Hammer”…and sickle! 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

NEWS ON THE MARCH! 

The Time: Who knows, dude?  
The scene: Anywhere Far-out! Drugged-out hippies take over  
the movie business. It’s a bad trip, man! 

Like any great era, the glorious days of the Blacklist had to end, but instead of 

spawning a new, Goldenest Age, Hollywood handed the keys to the kingdom 

to a generation of director-rebels fresh from Film School. 

Once  again,  Higher  Education  took  a  perfectly  decent  slice  of  Americana, 

threw it to the ground and had its way. (Read Chapter 8 – at your own risk!) 

Your  Scorseses,  your  Coppolas,  and  a  few  non-Italian  directors  turned 

Hollywood on its ear in the name of a gritty, “realistic” style of filmmaking.4 

Movies, once fantastic dreamscapes where cowboys fought Indians and gay 

men  kissed  Elizabeth  Taylor,  became  squalid  nightmares  where  cowboys 

turned tricks and hillbillies kissed Ned Beatty. 

Tip 10%  
(unless they cut your  
steak into tiny pieces  
for you) 

These  new  Frank  Crapras  wanted  to  be  “important.”  To  regular  folks  like 

you and me, “important” is remembering to tip before tax and not putting tin 

foil in the microwave. To Hollywood, “important” means picking an issue no 

one  cares  about  and  making  it  a  movie.  Well,  guess  what?  The  Golden  Age 

of movies tackled their fair share of “difficult issues.” I can think of several 

memorable films that tackled the difficult issue of how to get a large number 

of women to fall into a pool like dominos. 

Just  because  these  days  a  few  Hollywood  elites 

decide some issue is “important” enough to make 

a  movie  out  of,  why  do  I  have  to  suffer  through 

Syriana? Hey George “Looney,” last time I checked 

Full disclosure:  
I have never checked. 

it was called Syria. 

Here’s a Fact of Life. Your best work is behind you. 

What went wrong? 

140  4 I give these new movies two thumbs up—to gouge out my eyes. 

H O L L  Y W O O D  

I  say,  if  Hollywood  absolutely  must  make  a  Message  Movie,  make  one  like 

Starship Troopers. This was the perfect political allegory, because I didn’t get 

it. People tell me it was about something, but all I know is that good-guy-army-

guy shot bad-guy-monster-bugs with lasers in space. Four stars! 

AUTHOR!  AUTHOR!:  The  Hollywood  agenda  is  so  insidious  and  corro-
sive  that  I  considered  not  devoting  a  chapter  to  it,  just  to  be  safe.  I  was 

going  to  fold  it  into  the  chapter  on  the  gays  or  the  chapter  on  the  gay 

communists. [Note to Ed.—if we cut “Hunting and Mounting the American 

Commusexual,” I walk.] 

There is another dark side to Hollywood. It’s not just the shattered dreams, 

or  the  cheap  porn,  or  the  moderately  priced  porn.  There’s  something  much 

That’s right. Both sides 
are dark. 

worse. 

HOLLYWOOD LIBERALS 

That  shining  city  that  only  cares  about  money  has  an  underbelly  that  only 

cares about saving the world. It’s getting so America can’t ignore the tiniest 

humanitarian crisis without some big movie star going on Access Hollywood 

to bitch about it. 

I guess the Motion Picture Academy mails out a pet cause with every Oscar 

nomination, because no sooner do we inform a star that we like him/her than 

But not a he/she! 

they’re up on some soapbox. 

You know who I’m talking about: 

THE FOUR HORSEMEN OF THE APOCA-LEFT 

Sean Penn 

Barbra Streisand 

Tim Robbins 

Kirsten Dunst 

These  four  are  constantly  whining  about  injustice,  chaining  themselves  to 

redwoods, bad-mouthing our president, and tormenting us with their portrayals 

of the perfect yet unattainable hometown girl. 

141 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Somewhere  along  the  line,  these  A-list  A-holes  confused  “box  office”  with 

“running for office.” Hey  Celebrities! Just because 20 million people went 

to see your movie, that doesn’t mean 20 million people 

care  about  your  opinions!  Your  job  is  to  distract  us 

from the horrors of the world, not to call our attention 

to them! We just want to be entertained. We want you 

to make us laugh, or cry, or worry if two cheerleaders 

from such different backgrounds can ever bridge their 

differences. That’s it. 

They can! 

And you know what? Cut it out with the fundraisers already. Who’s getting all 

that  cash?  Refugees?  Rain  forests?  Harp  seals?  If  a  Harp  seal  needs  money 

that badly, it should do what I do. I hold a little fundraiser every day. It’s called 

Going to Work. Without it, I’d be a charity case. Maybe they should give it a 

shot.  Check the want ads—there’s plenty of them out there. And don’t give 

me “Harp seals can’t survive in an office habitat,” because that excuse doesn’t 

hold water anymore, thank you very much, Americans with Disabilities Act. 

You Hollywood liberal elites need to realize that you 

wouldn’t  be  famous  at  all  if  it  weren’t  for  Middle 

America.  So  stop  trying  to  use  your  fascinating 

portrayals of Marie Antoinette to turn red states blue. 

I’m no fan! 

You  have  a  choice.  You  don’t  have  to  support 

America—it’s a free country. But if you’re not going to 

stand up for This Land of Ours, at least be consumed 

by some inner demons. Snort glue. Make a sex tape. Spiral out of control in a 

headline-grabbing way until you’re wandering toothless through Malibu back-

yards or telling Larry King that you speak in a musical birdlike tongue to the 

alien beings that visit you at night in the form of vibrating bands of color on 

your bedroom wall. This is very entertaining while also being a cautionary tale 

for our children. 

Air Bud? 
I blame Title IX 

142 

Get a childproof cap 
on that skull! 

Apply Liberally 

H O L L  Y W O O D  

So  now that you know  what’s wrong with  Hollywood, let me ask you 

a Question. If someone screwed off the top of your head, scooped out your 

brain and filled your skull with garbage, would you fight back? You bet your 

screw-top head you would. 

IT’S A CULTURE WAR—TIME TO STRIKE BACK! 

Unlike Paul Newman, who seems to think that salad dressing is the cure-all for 

America’s ills, I’m a man of action. Here are a few simple steps you can take to 

end the stranglehold that the Entertainment industry has on our need for being 

entertained. 

Boycott!  Cut  them  off  from  your  money.  But  just  as  importantly,  cut  their 

message off from your eyes. Immediately stop consuming all entertainment. 

This  means  TV,  radio,  movies,  music,  video  games,  magazines,  newspapers, 

books, cell phone ringtones, the backs of cereal boxes, Bazooka Joe wrappers, 

riddles on Dixie Cups, fortune cookies, novelty t-shirts, and seafood restaurant 

placemats. Boredom will be your greatest enemy, so make your own fun. Time 

was a family could get a wonderful evening out of some sheet music and an 

egg timer. Bonus: You’ll be an empty-nester years earlier than your friends. 

Switch to Christian entertainment! For every corrupt Hollywood influence 

there’s a life-affirming Christian equivalent. For instance, instead of rotting my 

mind with the mindless violence of a game like “Grand Theft Auto,” I play “Left 

Behind: Eternal Forces.” That way, I know every enemy I kill goes directly to 

Hell. 

Write  letters!  Let  the  child-poisoners  know  that  you’re  keeping  an  eye  on 

them. Write them e-mails on an hourly basis to tell them how offensive you 

find  the  movies  you’re  not  seeing.  It’s  amazing  how  easy  it  is  to  make  “I’m 

praying for you” sound like a threat. 

I’m praying for you. 

Go  camping! Drop off the grid and get away from the corroding influences 

of the debased culture and return to nature, preferably to Idaho with a group 

of like-minded patriots, their child brides, and a cache of weapons. You never 

know  when  Alcohol,  Tobacco  and  Firearms  is  going  to  show  up  and  try  to 

make you watch Capote. 

Truman?  
More like False-man! 

143 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

If all else fails pull the old switcheroo and: 

Consume  everything!  Totally  immerse  yourself  in  the  filth  of  pop  culture  to 

build a callus on your soul. It’s like when my Dad caught me with cigarettes 

when I was twelve and forced me to finish an entire carton of Kools. Worked 

like a charm. Haven’t smoked a menthol since. 

CANARY IN A COAL MINE 

If you don’t think Hollywood has tricks up its sleeve, maybe you should get 

out of the sleeve-checking business. 

The problem with Hollywood, as if there weren’t enough problems already, 

is  that  the  minute  you’ve  whacked  that  weed  in  one  place,  up  it  sprouts 

somewhere  else.5

  Well,  the  latest  rock  it’s  crawled  out  from  under  is  a 

Not  content  to  pour  their  poison  across  the  silver  screen,  the  LA  studio 

heavyweights who run Broadway are now evidently shipping it directly to 

Need proof? Just look at this headline out of Wisconsin from the 

Appleton 

doozy.  

the Heartland. 

News-Leader: 

Disney’s “The Lion King” is about to hit town 
The staff of the Sommers Center for the Performing Arts is preparing for the 
The staff of the Sommers Center for the Performing Arts is preparing for the 
arrival of the Broadway hit. “Everybody is very excited,” said town manager 
of the Broadway hit. “Everybody is very excited,” said town manager
Barbara Kingholm.
Barbara Kingholm. 

Sadly these milk-fed innocents clearly don’t know what they’re in for. 

144  5 I recommend RoundUp by the good folks at Monsanto! 

H O L L  Y W O O D  

But I’ve been there, so let me warn you. The effects of live theater are way 

harder to shake off than movies. It’s frighteningly intimate and, worst of all, 

you’ve got no control

. It’s like breaking up with a girl in person. 

When I watch The Lion King at home, I can safely end the movie before 

Mufasa’s untimely death. But when I bring my remote control to the live 

performance, it doesn’t work.

6 All I can do is watch helplessly as the hyenas 

execute their perfect crime. 

“Slow down, you wildebeests! That lion is your king!” 

Apparently  yelling  at  the  stage  is  verboten,  even  if  to  challenge  Scar  to 

pistols at dawn. 

Because  I  am  always  ushered  out  at  this  point,  but  not  soon  enough  to 

spare me a harsh dose of reality. You see, a movie you can dismiss when 

the lights come up. 

But a play? Those animals were real people. 

Makeup W zardry! 

i

6  I even tried changing the batteries. 

145 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  FO R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

Here’s a joke for you: 

A man walks into a bar. The bartender says, “What will it be, 

Mac?” The man looks at the drink menu and says, “How ’bout a 

revolution of the proletariat?” 

Zing! I wrote that one for Dinah Shore back in 1954. 

You see, I used to be a comedy writer, and like many 

comedians during the ’50s, there was nothing I wanted more 

than to use my jokes to overthrow the government and replace 

it with a classless Communist society.  

It all started when I was a kid. I remember sitting in the 

movie house watching The Three Stooges, hearing everyone 

Mort Sinclair, 
Former TV Comedy 
Writer, Communist 

laugh, and thinking to myself, “I know what I want to do. Undermine the capitalist 

system and replace it with collective farms.” 

Quick! A man and his wife are lying in bed. The wife says, “Honey, why don’t you 

roll over here and kiss me?” The man says, “I would, but I’m shackled by my capitalist 

oppressors!” Hot-cha! 

The first job interview I had was with Milton Berle. I’ll never forget what he said to 

me after reading my joke packet: “Good material, kid, but I think you can inject more 

references to the industrial class structure.” 

And he was right. Only three of my jokes mentioned the evils of private owner-

ship. That’s comedy gold!  To me the perfect joke didn’t end with a laugh, but with an 

agonizing reappraisal of the worker’s suppression by the entrenched plutocrats. 

It’s funny because it’s true. 

Of course, my career as a TV comedy writer wasn’t always easy. But whenever 

things got rough, I’d remind myself that if my jokes got just one person to sell nuclear 

secrets to the Russians, then it was all worth it. 

I’ll leave you with this joke I wrote for Sid Caesar: 

“President Truman is like Communist ideology. No class.” 

Za-bang! 

FUN 

ZONE 

Match the Celebrity with Their Pet Cause 

1 Leonardo DiCaprio 

2 Rosie O’Donnell 

3 Sheryl Crow 

4 Alec Baldwin 

a “End the war in the Middle East!”  B “Equal rights for homosexuals!” 

C “Stop global warming!” 

D “Hey!  Look at me!” 

(Answers:  1-D; 2-D; 3-D; 4-D) 

Part Three 

MY AMERICAN MATURITY 

In  1997,  I  was  made  the  anchor  of  the  Channel  7  News  on  WPTS  Patterson 
Springs, North Carolina. I got promoted after I narced out the previous anchor, 
Wayne Colt, for his coke addiction and won a local Emmy for my investigative 
report, “Anchor Away: The Tragic Downward Spiral of Wayne Colt.” 

I was getting too big for Patterson Springs (Pop. 620), so that fall I sent out 
a reel of my best reports: “From Wayne to Worse: The Continuing Struggles 
of  Wayne  Colt,”  “Wayne  Damage:  The  Hidden-Camera  Footage  Wayne  Colt 
Begged Me Not to Show You,” “Wayne, Wayne Go Away: Living in Fear of a 
Former Colleague,” and “Never the Wayne Shall Meet: My Restraining Order 
Against Wayne Colt, Coke Fiend.” 

I immediately got a call from The Daily Show. I had made it to the Big Time, 

so I moved to the Big City and bought the Big House. 

Now I had real responsibilities. If something goes wrong with your house, 
it’s your problem. And boy, can things go haywire. There’s electricity and fuse 
boxes  and  three-prong  outlets.  It’s  like  living  in  the  Space  Station.  No  one 
warned me that life would involve science, except my science teacher. But, of 
course, he’s going to say that. He’s got a job to protect. 

Four months after moving in, I noticed that the yard looked terrible. When 
we did the final walk-through, the lawn was beautiful. Now the grass was waist 
high and shaggy. Had I been sold a bill of goods? I faced the problem like a man 
and I called my lawyer. 

He called a landscaper. 
Now  I  knew  a  lot  of  yard  guys  were  illegal  immigrants—Blue-Collar 
Banditos  stealing  manual  labor  jobs  away  from  Americans  who  had  moved 
onto something less strenuous. So I let them do the lawn, then asked to see 
their green cards. They didn’t have any, so I went inside and called INS. When 
Los Federales rolled up, I shouted from the window, “Enjoy mowing Mexico!” 
It  was  an  ugly  scene.  Turns  out,  they  didn’t  have  green  cards  because 
they were all Americans. In fact, African-Americans. I explained that I don’t 
see  Race.  On  that  subject,  I  am  very  enlightened—and  equally  endarkened. 
Eventually, everything was smoothed over with some sizeable tips to the land-
scapers, and to the cops. 

I  tell  this  story  to  illustrate  the  issues  we  all  face  as  American  Adults.  I 
call  them  the  four  Ss  and  one  M  of  Maturity:  Socioeconomics,  Segregation, 
Science, Sombreros, and the Media. 

149 

fig 12. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C HAPT ER 1 0 

T HE   ME D IA 

“I read the news today. Oh boy.”
 –John Lennon, Liverpudlian flash-in-the-pan 

MY 

FIRST JOB IN THE NEWS GAME WAS  
WRITING  THE  POLICE  BLOTTER  FOR   
THE  DORCHESTER  COUNTY  PENNY- 
SAVER IN MY HOME STATE OF SOUTH 

CAROLINA. I WAS 17, AND I WAS HUNGRY. I’D HANG OUT 

AT THE LOCAL PRECINCT, PORING OVER POLICE REPORTS 

AND  SWAPPING  WAR  STORIES  WITH  THE  BOYS  IN  BLUE. 

Great  bunch  of  guys—Seamus,  Mickey,  Potato  Bill,  Old  Whiskey  Pat,  New 

Whiskey Pat, Paddy, and “Irish” (the black guy). It was a great way to hone my 

journalistic chops while learning about Law and Order. I took the job seriously, 

and I did it well. Recently, I unearthed my first column from its frame on my 

wall: 

Police Blotter by Stephen “Tater” Colbert
by Stephen “Tater” Colbert 

, an Of 

1:44 
LOITERING: At
LOITERING: At 1:44
am Tuesday
ficer 
am Tuesday, an Officer
pursued two suspects
pursued two suspects 
believed to be playing loud 
believed to be playing loud
music in the parking lot
music in the parking lot 
behind Durant Hardware
behind Durant Hardware 
at V 
at Vandberg A
suspects were described
suspects were described 
as two males in their
as two males in their 
late teens. (Sounds like 
late teens. (Sounds like
Hispanics to me.) 
Hispanics to me.)

NARCOTICS: A s
ROBBERY: An elderly
ROBBER 
Y: An elderly
NARCOTICS: A suspi-
uspi-
Rosinville resident, 79, told
cious person was reported
cious person was reported  Rosinville resident, 79, told 
police that somebody might
loitering outside a gas
police that somebody might 
loitering outside a gas 
have entered her residence 
station near the bus depot. 
have entered her residence
station near the bus depot.
and moved items around.
(Probably somebody
and moved items around. 
(Probably somebody 
Nothing appeared to be
Nothing appeared to be 
waiting for drug dealers 
waiting for drug dealers
venue. The  —maybe a couple of loud  missing. (Tip: She might
missing. (Tip: She might 
Hispanic drug dealers?
want to check her ketchup. It 
drug dealers? 
want to check her ketchup. It
Come on, America! Control  may have turned into salsa. 
Come on, America! Control  may have turned into
m just saying, if you want
the borders!) 
I·I·m just saying, if you want
the borders!)
to keep ants out of the picnic
to keep ants out of the picnic 
basket, you build a fence.) 
basket, you build a fence.)

andberg Avenue. The  —maybe a couple of loud

Feel free to cut this
out and frame it on
your wall.

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

No American editors 
wanted that job? 

My editor, Mr. Salinas, let me go after one column. This was my first cold, hard 

lesson in how “telling it like it is” isn’t always “appreciated like it is.” And I’d 

say not much has changed in the news game since then. I’ve faced the same 

prejudices against my in-your-face, take-no-prisoners style at every job along 

the way.1 

The  Bad  News:  The  greatest  threat  facing  America  today—next  to  voter 

fraud,  the  Western  Pinebark  Beetle,  and  the  memory  foam  mattress—is  the 

That doesn’t mean 
you’re off the hook, 
iodized salt. 

national news media. 

Hint: Yes 

The answer is Yes. 

Simple Question with a “Yes” answer: Is the mainstream press too liberal? 

Need proof? Just look at some of the headlines I’m able to imagine. 

152 

1 Evidently, playing Kaiser Roll Basketball with the deep-fat frier is too “out there” for the Arby’s Corporation. 

T H E   M E D I A  

The  Good  News:  There  are  a  few  journalists  who  aren’t  registered  sex 

offenders.  These  people  work  for  Fox  News.  Now,  I  have  a  well-cured  beef 

with Fox. “Fair and Balanced?” Which is it? Make up your mind! I’m sure guys 

like Brit Hume and Sean Hannity are well-intentioned, but by trying to present 

both sides of each story, they’re suggesting that the truth exists somewhere in 

the middle. You know what’s really in the middle? 

A cream filling? 

The Gray Area. 

News Business. 

Shades of gray are for brain tissue and the weak. Neither one has a place in the 

I like my Truth like my coffee: Black or White. 

Wake  Up  Call:  If  I  die,  I  know  that  I’m  either  going  to  Heaven  or  to  Hell. 

Heaven, just to be clear 

There’s no gray area there. 

THE TOP MAINSTREAM MEDIA NEWS OUTFITS 
THAT ARE KILLING OUR CHILDREN 

NPR: What’s wrong with NPR? Just listen to Morning Edition. This is by far 

the least zany “Morning Zoo” ever to hit the airwaves. Instead of the get-up-

and-go-larity provided by your local Scott and Tom, or Ted and Zeke, or Denise 

and  Santana,  or  Coyote  Mike  and  The  Beemer,  Morning  Edition  presents 

NPR’s measured barbiturate vibe.2 

CONTENT of MORNING ZOO 

57% 
Sound effects 

15% 
Glowing 
descriptions  
of Fundraising 
Gift Mug 

CONTENT of MORNING EDITION 
4%
Word Jazz 

39% 
Sedition

“Count your Chickens! 
Coyote’s on the Prowl!” 
– Z 98.6 Body Temperature 
Rock! 

3% 
Contests that  
kill people 

6% 
Dead air 

8% 
Promos for the  
show you’re 
listening to 

12% 
Host discussion/presentation of 
incomprehensible/illegal sex act 

14% 
Prank calls 

28%
Wry essays by 
New Englanders 

14%
Light Gray 

2 Fun Fact: NPR broadcasts at the same frequency as a coma patient’s brainwaves. 

153 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Lefties get up on the  It’s a wonder the lefties who wake up to it are able to get out of bed. 

wrong side of the bed. 
The left side. 

I guarantee that if Morning Edition had to compete in the free market, you’d 

hear a lot more prank phone calls to the Supreme Court asking if that’s a gavel 

“in their docket.” 

WHAT DOES NPR REALLY STAND FOR? Toss a few of these out at the 

next East Coast Ivy League Cocktail party you get roped into, and watch 

Billy Bleeding Heart choke on his brie.3 
Nancy Pelosi Radio, Nader Presidential Radio, 

Nazi Palestinian Radio, No Penis Radio, Natalie Portman Radio 

Try “Nasty Panda Radio” 
(It fits.) 

N

 P

 Radio (Let your imagination soar!)

THE “BIG THREE” NETWORKS 

CBS: The Tiffany network is responsible for the perennial Sunday Night Post-

Game buzzkill, 60 Minutes. Morley Safer and his team of aged 

jackals present what I believe is the worst kind of investigative 

journalism—the kind with investigations. On the other hand, I 

like the innovations that Katie Couric has brought to The CBS 

Katie Couric 

Evening  News,  especially  the  innovation  of  having  viewers 

turn elsewhere for news. 

Brian Williams 

NBC: A lot of people make the mistake of getting their nightly 

newscast  from  Brian  Williams,  when  the  real  star  of  the 

“Peacock” news division is the Law and Order franchise. All 

the plots are “ripped from today’s headlines.” 

ABC:  When  Charlie  Gibson  took  the  evening  news  anchor 

chair, I doubted he had the heft for the job. But those fears were 

put at ease once I learned he had changed his name to “Charles 

Gibson.” As far as liberal bias is concerned, jury’s still out. 

Charlie  Charles 

 Jury’s back in: Guilty! 

CSPAN: CSPAN’s liberal bias is severely underestimated. With its unvarnished 

gavel-to-gavel coverage of our elected leaders, CSPAN glamorizes big govern-

Catch me on BookTV!  ment  by  showing  not  only  how  it  works,  but  that  it  sometimes  does  work. 

Oct. 3rd! 

CSPAN 2 may be just as dangerous, but has never been watched. 

154  3 “Soft-cheese asphyxiation” is the 2nd leading cause of death among intellectuals, after “drinking with 

Christopher Hitchens.” 

T H E   M E D I A  

THE  DORCHESTER  COUNTY  PENNYSAVER:  Peaked  for  one  week  in 

1981. (See page 151) 

THE NEW YORK TIMES: One of the few downsides to my job is that I have 

to read The New York Times every day. Why? To quote my old friend Wesley 

“Irish”  Snipes,  “Know  thine  enemy.”  I  do  this  dirty  work  as  a  service  to  my 

viewers, as the Times’ cornucopia of bias and lies provide an endless source of 

things for me to be outraged about. And outrage is what makes me go. I call it 

“The Juice” because like steroids, The New York Times fills you with rage and 

shrinks your genitalia. 

Or so I’ve heard 

And—get this—there isn’t even a comics page in The New York Times. I think 

that says all anyone needs to know about The Somber Gray Lady. Evidently, 

the Ochs and the Sulzburgers and the Dowds and the Krugmans think they’re 

above it all. They look down on regular folk like you and me who delight at 

Garfield’s lasagna-fueled “Cat-itude.” So I’m forced to fashion my own Grin Bin 

by making up funny captions to photos in the International section. Here’s one 

to tape to your cubicle! 

THE LIGHT AT THE END OF THE TUNNEL VISION 

Over the last few years, the Internet has grown from a haven for pornography 

and  pet  anecdotes  into  a  haven  for  pornography  and  pet  anecdotes  where 

people go for news. The source-checking, story-verifying, reality-worshipping 
dinosaurs of the mainstream media are being pushed aside by the emergent  Evolution is a farce, but 
tree shrews of the blogosphere. 

Evolution metaphors come 
in handy. 

155 

Town Crier 

The Voices! 
Stop the Voices! 

Horoscope 

Mainstream 
Media 

Internet

With their 
Pro-Landing-Gear 
Agenda 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Do I have any hard data to back these claims up? 

No, but I posted this on the Internet: 

WHERE PEOPLE GET THEIR NEWS 

Past 

Present 

The  beauty  of  new  media  is  that  no  evidence  is  necessary.  The  brave  blog -
troopers  have  stormed  the  cockpit  of  news,  and  wrested  the  joystick  of   
authority  away  from  the  seasoned  pilots  of  the  press  who  would  land  our   
country at Facts International Airport. Now there’s fresh blood at the controls,  
without any of the preconceived notions of the rudder-and-flaps crowd. 

This  is  the  age  of  the  open-source  encyclopedia.  Words  like  “research”  and   
“corroborated” now mean whatever the majority says they mean. Personally,  
I’m voting for “research” to mean “speculation” and “corroborated” to mean “a  
zesty sour cream-based dip.”  

Example: 
Recent  research  indicates  that  Barack  Obama’s  ties  to  Al  Qaeda  have  been   
corroborated. And they are delicious on baby carrots. 

But if you ask me, and you implicitly did ask me by buying this book, the digital  
bloom may soon be off the virtual rose. These days even Wolf Blitzer covers  
blogs on his show, and the first thing every journalist learns is the five “W’s” of  
journalism: 

Who, What, When, Where, and  
Wolf-Blitzer-is-for-hospital-patients-and-old-people. 

156 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  FO R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

Hi! I’m Amy! 

To be honest, I don’t watch much TV news. The 24-hour 

cable stations focus too much on garbage I don’t want my kids 

to see. And what with working as a cashier at ShopCo, I don’t 

have time to read a newspaper. So, I mostly get my news from 

Time

and Newsweek and Modern Bride and the other news 

weeklies on the rack. A glance at their covers is all I need to 

keep me in touch with what’s going on in the world. 

And let me tell you, it is a mess. Just look at Iraq. “Can We 

Win?” Or “Is It Too Late to Win the War?” I guess it all depends 

on “How Soon We Can Get Out.” “Looking for a Way Out” is part 

Amy Anatoly  
Canton, Ohio 

of “The Way Out,” but we can’t forget there are “6 Ways to Fix It” and 

“75 Ways to Make Your Wedding Fabulous!” I think everybody over there just needs to 

“Stress Less, Relax More” and “Have Vacation Sex Without Leaving Home!” 

Plus, from what I gather, “The Search for Historical Jesus” is going no better than 

“The Search for the Real Jesus” or even “The Search for Jesus.” And until we find 

Jesus, “The Search for Mary” seems like jumping the gun. 

Of course, we’ve got problems here at home, too. I have to wonder, “Toxic Toys? 

Are Kids Safe?” For that matter, “Are Kids Too Wired For Their Own Good?” “Do Kids 

Have Too Much Power?” “Are We Giving Kids Too Many Drugs?” But, most impor-

tantly, “Do We Care About Our Kids?” 

One thing’s for sure. We should all “Be Worried. Be Very Worried.” Especially 

because, even though our brains are “Wired for Worry,” no one really knows “Why We 

Worry About the Wrong Things.” “Is Anything Safe?” 

It gets so bad that some days, the only thing that gives me hope is that “Space 

Tourism May Be Closer Than You Think!” 

Well, that’s my break. Gotta get back to the Express Lane. Lotta pressure. 

See you “Inside the iPhone!” 

Bye! 

FUN 

ZONE 

Gut Teaser
THE “LIMO PROBLEM” 

™ 

event in Manhattan. 

A limo driver has been dispatched to bring Tucker Carlson, James Carville and 

A Boston Cream Pie from MSNBC headquarters in New Jersey to a big-time press 

Unfortunately, due to cutbacks at MSNBC, the limo can only carry one thing at a time. 

The limo driver can’t leave Carlson alone with Carville, because Carville is insane and 

will attack and destroy Carlson, and of course one can’t leave a Boston cream pie alone 

with Tucker Carlson. How will the pundits and the dessert get across the Hudson River 

to the event? 

FUN 

ZONE 

OP-ED Illusion 
Is this Bob Novak arguing with Paul Begala, or just a very poorly constructed vase? 

Newsmedia Mix-em-up! 

Descramble these names from the news 

media, then use the circled letters 

to solve the riddle. 

T KC R E U  

T I N A H N Y  

N O D  M U S I  

P O CO R E  

“The 

“Where Blitzer eats breakfast?” 

” 

ANS WERS: A. Tucker, B. Hannity, C. Don Imus, D. Cooper, “The Situation Nook” 

fig 13. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C HAPT ER 1 1 

C L AS S  WA R 

“We’re moving on up! To the East Side! To a De-luxe Apartment in the Sky!”
 –George Jefferson, Dry Cleaner and Civil Rights Leader 

TALES 

FROM  THE  HEART:  LET  ME  TELL 

YOU A STORY. GROWING UP, I LIVED 

IN  A  CLASSIC  AMERICAN  NEIGH-

BORHOOD. IT WAS A MELTING POT 

OF  HARDWORKING  IRISH,  BRITISH,  ENGLISH,  SCOTTISH, 

SCOTS-IRISH,  WELSH  AND  NORTHERN  IRISH.  EACH 

More of a 
“melting keg.” 

MORNING, MY POP WOULD RISE AT THE CRACK OF DAWN 

and walk a mile to pretend he was going to the store to pick up our breakfast. 

In the winter months, he’d chop down a neighbor’s woodshed so we would 

have fuel to burn. When he got home, he would polish our shoes. If we couldn’t 

afford shoes, he’d polish our feet. Then he’d send us off to school, with our 

sack lunches of pinecones and salt. Once he knew we were taken care of, he’d 

leave for his job working for the local rich guy. 

All day in class, I would think about what my dad did for us, how hard he 

worked, and that I never wanted to do any of that. I wanted to be the local rich 

guy. Today, I am.1 

Don’t ruin the text. 
Let your tears fall 
here 

1 If you’re late one more time, you’re fired, Dad. 

161 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

REALITY CHECK: What is the point of my story? Through clean living, moral 

fortitude,  and  the  foresight  to  narc  out  Channel  7’s  coke-addicted  news 

anchor,  and  then  take  his  job  and  win  a  regional  Emmy  for  my  coverage  of 

his downward spiral, I changed my class status. That’s right, folks. I’m talking 

Also, Mike  the 
prompter guy? 
Hopped up on 
Screamers 

about Class. 

WHAT  IS  CLASS?  Class is a way of looking at society that divides people 

into different categories based on how much money they’re willing to make. 

England has 2: 
Cockneys and 
Guv’ners. 

BY THE NUMBERS: Every society has its own class structure with a unique 

number of classes. France has five: Les Aristocrats, Les Bourgeoisie, Les 

Petit-Déjeuners,  Les  Grand  Mal,  and  Les  Moonves.  India  has  one  of  the 

most rigid and complex class structures. Based upon their behavior in past 

lives, all Indians are born into different stratas of society called “castes.” 

These castes forever determine what level of tech support questions they 

are allowed to answer. 

Middle class: get off 
the fence. 
We’re at War. Pick 
a side.2 

We in America have three classes: Upper, Middle and Lower. 

When I was growing up, we were in the Lower, and today, I’m in the Upper. 

SO WHICH CLASS ARE YOU? 

Ever have a nagging suspicion that you’re poor? I know my staff does. And 

that’s one of the reasons I devised this handy “Know Your Class” chart. 

Class distinctions aren’t just used to figure out where you sleep on a cruise 

ship.  They  are  also  used  by  pollsters  and  advertisers  to  better  understand 

our buying habits. 

should pay attention to. 

If  you  know  which  class  you  belong  to,  you  know  which  commercials  you 

162  2 To future readers: I assume we’re at war with someone. 

C L A S S   W  A  R  

INSTRUCTIONS 

For each question, circle the response that’s closest to your answer. Good Luck. 

QUESTION 

LOW E R 

MIDDLE 

UPPER 

What keeps you 
up at night? 

Sound of your own 
weeping 

Growing suspicion 
you’ve been duped 

“Should my topiary 
animals be alpha-
betized by plant 
or by animal they 
represent?” 

Retirement 
activities 

Diabetes 

Your annual 
Federal tax bill 

0 

Unable to retire 
thanks to children’s 
educations 

Alternating rounds 
of golf and plastic 
surgery 

$25,000 

0 

Favorite drink 

Chardonnay 

Grain alcohol and 
Robitussin 

Powerball ticket 

Plan for accruing 
wealth 

What did you eat 
for breakfast? 

High fructose 
corn syrup 

Scrimping and 
saving 

Whatever Jenny 
Craig said I could 

The fire escape 

Mall of America 

Human Growth 
Hormone 

Continuing to 
breathe 

Scrambled 
Fabergé Eggs 

Private island that’s 
shaped like me 

Gun Ball 

Softball team spon-
sored by bar you 
hide from family in 

Training show dogs 
to play polo 

Any broadcast with 
Anderson Cooper 
on the edge of tears 

Everybody Loves 
Raymond 

History Channel: 
Finding 
Nazi Gold! 

$175 Nike Air Force 
25 Supremes 

Whatever Payless 
had in my size 

No shoes. Had the 
yard leathered. 

Where did you 
go on your last 
vacation? 

What sports do 
you play? 

What TV show 
best reflects 
your life? 

What kind of 
shoes do you 
wear? 

TOTAL SCORE: 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Now count up your circled answers by column. 

The column with the most circles is your class! 

(If you feel like your answer is in between two responses, making you, say, 

“upper-middle  class,”  you  should  remember  that  the  phrase  “upper-middle 

class”  is  a  meaningless  term  created  by  the  Upper  class  to  keep  the  Middle 

class from joining with the Lower class when the Revolution comes.) 

Based on your score, fill in the blanks. 

“I,

 , am 

class.”

 (Name Here) 

Introduce yourself this way from now on, and you’ll quickly learn if you’re at 

the right party. 

WANT TO CHANGE YOUR CLASS? HERE’S HOW. 

As a pundit, it’s my job to fight for the little guy. In terms of the percentage of 

population, that means the Upper class. But all Americans are important to 

me. I won’t be satisfied until everyone is in the top one percent. 

See, we’re lucky here in America. We live in a free market society. Think of 

it as a ladder. No matter what rung you’re born on, you have the exact same 

opportunity as everyone else to get to the top. Sure, you might say that some 

folks have less distance to climb than others, or that many of the lower rungs 

are slippery because they’re covered with garbage and your high school didn’t 

have an AP Ladder Climbing class, and the rung right above you is out of order 

and your landlord keeps saying he’s going to fix it but he never does and all the 

while the guy who hangs out on the corner of your rung is constantly trying to 

get you high, and you’re wondering if maybe you could get a little help up this 

ladder? Well, Mister, all the help you need is at your fingertips, if your finger- 

tips are touching your ankles. I’m talking about bootstraps. 

You can always pull yourself up by your bootstraps or turn the lemons 

When life hands 
you a farm, make 
Farm-Aid. 

life has given you into lemonade. 

Clearly, America has no shortage of metaphorical opportunities for the poor. 

Don’t tell the poor 
about the escalator. 

164 

C L A S S   W  A  R  

But  some  people  would  rather  stay  poor  just  to  make  us  feel  guilty.  Well, 

don’t  look  for  any  sympathy  here.  Instead  of  getting  rich  and  paying  their 

No sympathy here either 

own way, they’d rather go on welfare, and the liberals are more than happy 

to give it to them. 

Now,  I’m  not  the  smartest  knife  in  the  spoon,  so  explain  this  to  me.  We’re 

supposed  to  help  folks  out  of  poverty  by  giving  them  a  financial  reward 

for being poor? Doesn’t add up. If being poor is a never-ending money party, 

where’s the incentive to get rich? 

Answer  me  this:  what’s  going  to  help  a  shiftless  vagabond  more,  a  page 

of  food  stamps  or  the  page  from  this  book  where  I  explain  the  free  market 

“ladder”? 

a ladder is. 

Hint: My paragraph gives him motivation and maybe even teaches him what 

AT  THIS  POINT:  You’re  probably  wondering  why  I  titled  this  chapter 

“Combat of the Class Commandos: The Coming Cashpocalypse.” My editor 

may  have  changed  it  to  something  else.  But  he’ll  regret  it.  Publishing  101: 

Alliteration sells books. (I spent hours trying to make that rule alliterative, 

but it’s impossible.) 

GUT SPEAKING: Now some people might say it’s callous not giving food 

stamps to poor people. They would say it’s just another example of class 

warfare.  Well,  there  is  no  class  war  in  this  country.  The  Upper  class  has 

such a tactical advantage that if the Lower class makes a sudden move we’ll 

have a class massacre. 

If  you  ask  me,  the  Upper  class  shows  admirable  restraint.  They  could  easily 

freeze out the poor and man their factories with robots or mice. Instead, they 

offer them the opportunity for a decent wage, and up to two bathroom breaks. 

But  do  folks  in  the  Lower  classes  respond  with  even  a  simple  gesture  of 

gratitude like giving up a decent wage and one of those bathroom breaks? No. 

Instead, they form unions, which they use to bully our nation’s factory owners 

with walkouts, strikes, and that one Sally Field movie where she plays a labor 

organizer with sixteen personalities. 

Buy book. Big bargain, 
bro. 

“Classacre” for short 

If you’re reading this 
in the bathroom, get 
back to work! 

Steel Magnolias? 

165 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

ARE YOU IN A UNION? (Please circle one) 

Yes 

No 

Thank you for filling out my labor questionnaire. If you circled “yes,” know that 

I could have you replaced with a single phone call. There are hundreds of scabs 

out there who can read my book just as well as you can. Don’t tempt me. 

Don’t feel guilty, 
scabs. 
You help with the 
healing. 

WILL YOU TEMPT ME? (Please circle one) 

Yes 

No 

I trust you made the right choice. 

CANARY IN A COAL MINE 

Take a look at this little tit bit I found in The Chicago Tribune: 

Seems  some  enviro-“mental”  group,  the  Ecology  Center,  is  claiming  that 

the  new-car  smell  we  all  crave  is  actually  a  deadly  cocktail  of  chemical 

pollutants: 

That New-car Smell May Be Newest Hazard 

Of primary concern are bromine used for flame retardants, chlorine used in
Of primary concern are bromine used for flame retardants, chlorine used in 
plasticizers and lead used in plastics, as well as arsenic, copper, mercury and
plasticizers and lead used in plastics, as well as arsenic, copper, mercury and 
nickel that have been linked to allergies, birth defects, impaired learning, liver
nickel that have been linked to allergies, birth defects, impaired learning, liver 
toxicity and cancer.
toxicity and cancer.

Now  at  first  I  thought  this  was  just  another  buzz-shackle  attempt  by  the 

envious hippie nut-jobs who can’t afford a new car every season because 

chaining yourself to a maple tree doesn’t pay what it used to in the 60s. 

But then it hit me: something more insidious was going on here. Who spends 

a lot of time breathing in that new-car smell? The Upper Class. 

Who’s  loading  those  cars  up  with  toxic  chemicals?  Factory  Workers. 

So are we in a Class War? I don’t know, but if we are, it’s pretty clear who 

The Lower Class. 

just fired the first shot. 

166 

C L A S S   W  A  R  

A SURPRISING ADMISSION 

Sometimes I envy the folks in the Lower classes. Like the kid I was pretending 

to be in the story I made up at beginning of this chapter. They have so much to 

look forward to. Their bootstraps are so loose and fit for pulling. Mine can’t go 

any tighter. I’m losing circulation as it is. 

But poor people have a very precious gift: something to strive for. But I’ve got 

nothing left to reach for because I’ve been so successful at everything I’ve put my 
hands on. Sometimes I can’t think of a reason to get out of bed in the morning.  The Midas grope 
Luckily for me, I have a motorized bed. I like to drive it down to the rough side 

of town and give the people on the streets inspiration to work harder. 

167 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  F  O R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  A  G R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

I am living 

roof that the American Dream is  ossible!  U  ward 

mobility exists in this land of o 

ortunity!

 

Ex  lanatory note: I a  ologize, but my ty  ewriter keyboard 

is missing the lowercase letter “  .”  As my job is to make 

ty  ewritten co  ies of all of Mr. Colbert’s  ersonal corres 

ondence, you might think this would  rove challenging. 

Fortunately, Mr. Colbert rarely uses lowercase letter “  ’s,” 

and when he does, I sim  ly remove the sheet of 

a 

er from

Thomas Bindlestaff, 
Executive Assistant 
to Mr. Stephen Colbert 

the ty  ewriter, reinsert the sheet of 

a 

er u

side-down, ty

e a

lowercase “d,” remove it again, reinsert it rightside u  and then 

roceed as I had been 

roceeding 

reviously, des 

ite my

ainful

and  ersistent  enman’s Gout. 

As I was saying, I’m movin’ u  !  Already I make nearly $18,000 a year!  And sooner 

or  later (sooner, I dearly ho  e), I shall be the family’s first self-made twenty-thousan-

daire! In “Colbert Bucks,” that is. 

Like all Mr. Colbert’s em 

loyees, my salary is

aid in company Scri  . Mr. Colbert has 

thoughtfully 

rovided a com  any store with a variety of  fine dry goods. It has all the 

essentials: ﬂour, salt, corn meal, rendered beef tallow, ticking and burla 

. 

My wife has her eye on a tin of baking 

owder. The ladies do love to dream! 

Oh! There’s the whistle! Is it dawn already? I must get started on Mr. Colbert’s 

corres  ondence. His re 

resentative may be in today. I need to make a good im 

ression.

I’m ho  ing to get my youngest a  osition with the firm removing debris from the 

hydraulic ram shaft. 

Only the wee ones will fit. Note to self: cut back on his ration of suet. 

Mark my words! I swear by the curvature of my s  ine, someday I shall be rich! 

Your Humble Servant, 

Thomas Bindlestaff 

FUN 

ZONE 

How many differences can you find in these pictures? 

Answers: One. The bottom family isn’t working hard enough. 

fig 14. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C HAPT ER 1 2 

R AC E 

“Ebony and Ivory, live together in perfect harmony, 
Side by side on my piano keyboard.”
 –Paul McCartney and Stevie Wonder, the surviving Beatles 

IS  SOMETHING 

INTERESTING 

THERE 

ABOUT  WHAT  MISTERS  WONDER 

AND MCCARTNEY STUMBLED UPON 

HERE  IN  THEIR  JAUNTY  TRIBUTE 

TO THE PIANO. WITH A LITTLE IMAGINATION, THE LYRICS 

CAN  ALSO  ACT  AS  A  METAPHOR  FOR  RACE.  THE  WHITE 

KEYS COULD REPRESENT WHITE PEOPLE, AND THE BLACK 
keys  could  represent  non-white  people.  Because  in  America,  people  of  all 

Asians represented 
by “Chopsticks” 

colors live in perfect harmony. 

But it hasn’t always been that way. 

Once upon a time, racism was a terrible problem in this country,1 and it’s still a 

subject you’re supposed to handle delicately.2 Sorry, folks, that’s not my style. 

I’m not actually sorry. 

I’m not afraid to disturb the skeletons in America’s closet, no matter what race 

those skeletons are. (You can tell by measuring the eye-teeth.) 

I’m going to talk about race, and I’m not taking any racial prisoners. 

NOT slaves 

WHERE DID RACISM COME FROM? 

Well, before the Civil War, skin color didn’t matter, because all black people 

were slaves. But then after they were freed that name “slave” didn’t really fit 

anymore,  so  former  slaves  started  calling  themselves  “Black”  or  “Negro”  or 

1   Approximately from 1864 to the recording of “Ebony and Ivory.” 
2  If race were a sweater, it would be made of cashmere, and you could only wash it by hand. 

171 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

“colored.” 3 In short, skin began to matter, and, folks, racism was off to the races. 

Suddenly, the world was divided. White people had their drinking fountains, 

and Black people had their drinking fountains. White people had their schools, 

and Black people had their drinking fountains.4 

After  about  a  hundred  years  of  this,  a  very  smart  man  named  Dr.  The 

Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. gave a speech and said, “I have a dream that 

this should end!” 

And it did.5 

May vary on a 
block-by-block basis 

Racism no longer exists in America. 

Museum gift shop 
sells “I have a dream” 
sleep mask. 

Don’t  believe  me? Down in Selma, Alabama, they recently opened up The 

National  Civil  Rights  Museum.  It’s  all  about  the  fight  against  racism.  Well, 

folks,  it  stands  to  reason  that  you  don’t  open  a  museum  for  something  that 

still exists. Case in point: the Air and Space museum. Once we “landed on the 

moon,”  Air  and  Space  was  over.  Scotchguard  Neil  Armstrong  and  hang  him 

from the ceiling. 

But  even  though  racism  is  over,  for  many  people,  sadly,  race  still  exists.  As 

long as any part of that word still lingers, we’re all in trouble. So, how do we 

erase Race? 6 Let me tell you how I did it. 

NEWS FLASH: I don’t see race.7 

THIS JUST IN: I used to see race. 

Caught your breath yet? I’ll say it again. 

I. Used. To. See. Race. In fact, I used to see it everywhere. I was very good at it, 

if I’m to believe what people shouted at me. 

My struggle 

But all that changed the day I read Ralph Ellison’s thought-provoking novel 

Invisible  Man.  I  found  myself  deeply  moved  by  his  tale  of  a  black  scientist 

who, through no fault of his own, becomes invisible and is driven mad. 

172  3  I’m pretty sure there are other terms, but my publicist insists that there aren’t. 

4  The stereotype ends now. Black people DO NOT drink more water than other races. 
5  With the help of Stevie Wonder and Paul McCartney. 
6  eRace is a registered trademark of Stephen Colbert’s web-based diversity program. 
7  In the same way I assume that everybody is White, I assume that every traffic light is green. 
   This sort of  positive thinking gets me home 15 minutes sooner. 

R A C E  

Reading Invisible Man made me realize something very important: If you’re 

invisible, it means you’re the same color as air. And air has no color. Then it hit 

me: If race is no longer to divide us, our races all need to be invisible! 

So,  maybe  until  that  great  day  when  all  humans  can’t  see  color,8  those  with 

darker  skin  should  take  the  Invisible  Man’s  brave  example  and  wrap  them-

selves in the white bandages of unity so that we all truly look the same color.  Albinos, you’re 
halfway there. 

You see, White people are already wrapped in bandages: the skin God gave us 

to protect us from racism. People of all colors deserve no less. 

MY VISION OF A RACE-FREE FUTURE 

Burn victim or Black guy? 
(It shouldn’t matter!) 

REMEMBER: While skin and race are often synonymous, skin cleansing is 

good, race cleansing is bad. 

8   I don’t see color, but I do see luster, and people with a semi-gloss finish are lazy. 

173 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

We’re  all  the  same.  Unfortunately,  not  everyone  sees  that.  They  get  too 

hung up on little things like “appearance” and “history” and “cultural identity.” 

In fact… 

I prefer to 
divide people by 
brand-loyalty. 

Some  People  seem  to  think  racism  still  exists.  These  people  are  racists. 

What’s their angle? I say follow the money. They have something to gain from 

keeping the race game afloat. What is it? 

BLIGHTS! SCAM-ERA! AFFIRMATIVE ACTION! 

Affirmative action is a prime example of the Leftist campaign to make ideas 

Like “ living wage” 

seem less dangerous than they are, through the strategic use of positive words. 

Think about it. How can something be bad if it is “affirmative”? And how can 

we ignore it if it is “action”? 9 See, its name does nothing to describe what “affir-

mative action” actually is: a system that rewards Group A and punishes Group 

B just because long ago something bad happened to Group A that incidentally 

made Group B a whole lot of money. 

Short version: 
“Never feel guilty.” 

One  of  my  mottos  is,  “Never  make  a  decision  because  you  feel  guilty.”  The 

bleeding hearts that came up with affirmative action back in the anything-goes 

1960s could have used my advice. They felt bad about the racial injustices of 

the past, so they decided to make it a crazy law that gave minorities preferen-

tial treatment when it came to the choicest jobs, scholarships, and roster spots 

Stay strong, NHL! 

on NBA teams. 

Like friendship, 
discrimination is a 
two-way street. 

GUT  SPEAKING:  The  worst  thing  about  affirmative  action  is  that  it 

encourages  reverse  discrimination,  so-called  because  it  goes  in  the 

opposite way of how we naturally discriminate. 

Here’s a typical story: A well-qualified young White man doesn’t get into the 

College  of  His  Choice,  but  has  a  strong  suspicion  that  a  lot  of  Black  guys 

might have. It gets worse: A hard-working White employee is passed over for a 

promotion in favor of a coworker who seems like he could be gay. What’s next? 

Should there be affirmative action in my bedroom? Should Chinese guys get a 

shot at my wife just because the conditions on the Transcontinental Railroad 

weren’t ideal? 

174  9 Sign me up! Sarcastically. 

R A C E  

But  the  worst  thing  about  affirmative  action  is  that  it’s  Big  Government 

intruding into the world of business. I don’t need some bureaucrat telling me 

to be an equal opportunity employer. When it comes to job applicants at the 

Report, race is irrelevant. All they have to do is answer a skill-testing ques-

tionnaire: 

Sample Question: 

Question 43: We·re shooting an episode of The Colbert Report at the beach. 
It·s a very sunny day. What number SPF sunblock do you use? Support your 
answer: 

When it comes to affirmative action, I quote myself: “Hogwash!” However, most 

people quote noted beagle-abuser President Lyndon Johnson, who summed up 

his stance on the issue with the following analogy: “Imagine a hundred yard 

dash in which one of the two runners had his legs shackled together. He has 

progressed ten yards, while the unshackled runner has gone fifty yards. How 

do they rectify the situ-

ation?  Do  they  merely 

remove 

the  shackles 

and  allow  the  race  to 

proceed?…Would it not 

be  the  better  part  of 

justice  to  allow  the 

previously 

shackled 

runner to make up the 

forty-yard  gap,  or  to 

start  the  race  all  over 

again?”10 

The press was a lot easier to entertain in 1964. 

10  He actually said this. 

175 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Johnson was right on one point: Racial issues in this country deserve the same 

amount of attention we give track and field events. 

While Johnson’s idea was terrible for public policy, he stumbled upon what I 

think would be a great improvement for track and field: shackles! How exciting 

would it be to give each runner a unique, massive obstacle to overcome! 

Here’s how I see the 100 yard dash of tomorrow: 

LANE 

A shackled runner 

Runner forced to wear a sandwich board 

Runner in ice skates 

Runner must run backward holding a hand mirror 

Runner’s pockets filled with sausages with a pack 
 of wild, angry dogs released on the field 

Bare feet on a lane of wet bathroom tile—
 responsible for 80% of household fatalities! 

Runner given horrible news moments before start—
 I mean really bad 

Death row inmate running on his knees. 
 If he wins, he’s freed! 

Just a reminder: None of these are metaphors. I want to see this actually 

happen. 

PROOF I’M NOT A RACIST: George Washington 

Carver had some pretty good ideas, like corrective 

lenses for peanuts. 

“Your grandmother 
  is on fire.” 

If you suffer from 
peanut allergies, turn 
the page quickly. 

176 

R A C E  

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  FO R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

Shout it from the loftiest mountaintops and through the 

deepest valleys: Racism is no more! Bigotry, that grim hydra, 

which once reared its heads in every corner of our proud 

society, infecting all Americans with its venomous bite, has 

been vanquished. And I have done my part to slay it. 

I marched on Washington shoulder-to-shoulder with Dr. 

King. I labored alongside Reverend Jackson in Chicago. I 

was instrumental in bringing integration to the University of 

Rev. George A. Lewis, 
Ex-Civil Rights Leader 

Alabama, and thanks in part to my actions, racism gave way to 

equality, oppression to justice, and segregation to brotherhood. 

But as justice rose like a mighty tide from the Mississippi 

delta to the highest corridors of power, my own sense of purpose receded. What is a 

Civil Rights leader to do once Civil Rights have been permanently achieved? 

For a while, I returned to full-time Reverending. But being a preacher is hard work, 

and let’s face it, without racism to rail against, my sermons didn’t have the same zazz. 

So I left my church and sought new causes to champion. 

I tried marching alongside another oppressed group, the homosexuals. But then I 

found out what they did when they weren’t marching. 

Other protests proved no better fit. I couldn’t in good conscience join the No-Nukes 

movement, because I’m a firm believer in America’s nuclear first strike capabilities. 

And I’d rather not recount the lack of appetite for political change at the St. Patrick’s 

Day Parade. 

After that, I flailed around a bit. I remained committed to the principles of non-

violence, but I adapted it to the injustices I encountered in the new post-racist world. 

I organized a sit-in to protest the unfair practices of a local restaurant. ($13.00 for a 

spicy tuna roll? Come on!) But it failed to achieve change. 

I grew isolated and disconsolate. And as painful as it is to admit, in the depths of my 

despair I once tried to reintroduce racism, but those Korean grocers would not rise to 

my bait. 

As of this writing, I am unemployed, and let me tell you, the pension benefits 

177 

offered by the Civil Rights Movement are meager at best.  I am currently available to 

fight for the downtrodden, freelance mass-rallying, and light roof repair. 

In the immortal words of Dr. King, “Free at last! Free at last! Thank God Almighty, 

I’m free at last.” If only he had known the cost. 

FUN 

ZONE 

SLUR FIND 

D F U I K N M N N O P L K S K M O 
S D K I N H C G H N M K C E D O J 
E C N B J I K O M O T S E L C N U 
D X U W N K P A M A W X N E W W E 
A R H N I J Z X S P I C D X K R A 
P A O E I L O O C C N E E C Z E E 
S G B Q S B N N C D K X R U B D L 
W H P J W U O H J I I W H R K S L 
C E M K O O L D R W E T B A C K M 
R B H A O L P X M N W S Y E M I L 
E V M I C K W E S M H E K I K L W 
N C P E K X M S I O Y F N I L P W 
A M S I D A R K Y W M T O W E L H 
L O D G K R O V B Y P O Y H M E R 
L P I L D F M X P O L A C K K M G 
V N J M K I E A A G C N I O L R M 
J P I N H I M X S L C J M W P D O 

How many racial slurs can you find in the grid above? 
Answer: Zero. Why? Do you see some, racist? 

R A C E  

CHAPTER POSTSCRIPT 

When I say I don’t see race, I mean I don’t see Black people.  
But I can spot a Mexican a hundred paces. 
Read on! 

179 

fig 15. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C H APT ER  1 3  

I MM IG RA NTS 

“You don’t have to live like a refugee.”
 –Tom Petty, who doesn’t because he’s an American 

RED 
ALERT!  

WE  ARE  BEING  COLONIZED  BY  AN 

INVADING  FORCE!  DID  YOU  KNOW 

THAT  THERE  ARE  MORE  ILLEGAL 

MEXICAN IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA 

TODAY  THAN  THERE  WERE  AMERICAN  TROOPS  IN 

OCCUPIED GERMANY AFTER WORLD WAR II? UNLIKE MOST 

OF MY FACTS, I CAN BACK THAT ONE UP WITH REALITY. 

Experts say there are 12 to 14 million illegal immigrants in the United States. 

To put that into perspective, if you took all the foreigners who have no business 

living in America and put them into Dodge Caravans (remember, those seat 

six) and drove them out of the country taking up all three lanes of a highway, 

the line of minivans would stretch for I don’t care how long, because the more 

important question is: How can we get them into those vans? 

GOOD NEWS: You won’t need any documentation to get into my opinions 

on  immigration,  because  through  the  very  act  of  buying  this  book  your 

identity has been electronically entered into a secret government registry. 

DO WE HAVE A PROBLEM WITH ILLEGALS? 

I’ll say! 

We still need a urine 
sample, however. 

We have a problem 
with illegals. 

181 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 
!!!!!!!! 

Carnegie was an immigrant!!!!!!!!” 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Now a lot of people, including my spellcheck, have a problem with the term 

“illegals.” They say it’s not a word, and even if it were it would be insensitive to 

the feelings of the people who are breaking our nation’s laws. Fine. Let’s call 

them “immorals” because what could be more immoral than a Guatemalan 

crossing into this country to pick our American fruit just because her kids 

are poor? 

I  can  hear  the  cries  now:  “How  can  you  suggest  that  we  slam  the  door?! 

America  is  a  nation  of  immigrants!!  We  all  have  ancestors  who  left  their 

crowded,  impoverished  homelands  behind  for  America!!!!  Even  Andrew 

First of all, cool it with the exclamation marks.1 The cost of this ink comes 

out  of  my  advance.  Second,  it’s  interesting  you  should  bring  up  Andrew 

Carnegie—one  of  our  nation’s  most  esteemed  robber  barons.  Yes,  he  was 

born in Scotland. So what makes him different from the type of “immorals” 

we’re experiencing today? 

Uncover your ears and listen. 

Once upon a Time, there was the right kind of foreigner. 

Yes, Virginia, there is a right kind of foreigner. The kind who comes to America, 

loses his brogue and creates U.S. Steel. When he dies, he leaves the legacy 

of  breaking  the  Homestead  Strike  of  1892,  paving  the  road  for  non-union 

workers everywhere! If he admits to any foreign ties, it’s to having a hunting 

estate  at  Skilbo  Castle  in  Scotland.  And  that’s  it.  No  parades.  No  crazy  hat 

dances.  His  only  clubs  are  ones  like  “The  South  Fork  Fishing  and  Hunting 

Club” whose manmade, trout-stuffed lake burst through its dam leaving 2,200 

dead in one of the greatest floods in American history, the Johnstown Flood 

of 1889. Sad event, great social club. Over 60 millionaires, and that was back 

I wonder what they 
cost today. 

when trolley rides cost a penny. 

GUT SPEAKING: Of course, we can’t all be Andrew Carnegies, but we can 

honor the struggles and ambitions of our immigrant ancestors by doing as 

they did: leaving the past behind for the sake of a brighter future. 

182  1 And don’t you dare put any of them upside-down and in front of sentences. 

I M M I G R A N T S  

MY  STRUGGLE: I am a member of a mixed-race marriage. While I am the 

proud product of hardy Irish Catholic stock, my wife is Scots Presbyterian. In 

the Old Country, our love could never have been. In fact, a glance at my wife’s 

family records shows that her ancestors moved onto the very land my family 

was forced to abandon when that Roundhead son-of-a-bitch Oliver Cromwell 

More like Crom-bad 

forced the Irish west of the river Shannon to farm rocks. But when the Colbert 

clan  set  sail  for  America,  they  harbored  two  shining  hopes:  that  they  could 

survive a three-month steerage passage on coal-and-onion-peel soup; and that 

one  day  their  children  could  forget  the  enmity  of  the  past  and  live  a  life  of 

freedom.  I’ve  done  them  one  better.  Seven  generations  on,  I’ve  “planted  my 

Irish flag” on the very family that stole our land. 

See, the great thing about my marriage is that it symbolizes the hope America 

once  offered  its  immigrants.  Here,  immigrants  received  a  gift  never  given 

before  in  world  history:  They  could  leave  the  past  behind. (Another  less 

exciting gift was cholera.) How lucky they were to get to erase all remnants 

of their previous lives, languages and cultures and go about the business of 

becoming an American Christian. 

Arrivederci, 
“Arrivederci” 

So let’s take that beautiful idea to its logical conclusion and not only leave the 

past behind but deny the past ever happened.2 Like this: 

America is not a land of immigrants. 

There. Was that so hard to say? It makes sense if you think about it. It feels like 

we’ve been here forever, doesn’t it? Let’s just assume we have been. 

How does it taste to smash the shackles of our past? It tastes like freedom. 

And freedom doesn’t 
need chipotle sauce 

Now that we’ve liberated ourselves from the old factual myth of our immigrant 

history, we can focus on the future. And let me tell you, there are dark times 

ahead, because for the first time in our new history we are being swarmed by 

legions of immigrants. 

2 What Alamo? 

183 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

And folks, it’s time to fight back. 

Also know 
government faked 
“Moon landing” 

up to us. 

We all know the government has refused to take action to end the problem. It’s 

Here are three things we can do to secure the borders today. 

The ponchos are 
coming! The ponchos 
are coming! 

1  Heavily arm our volunteer militias. The failure of leadership in 

Washington has given rise to a new border patrol of selfless patriots 

called the Minutemen. I have hung out with these guys. Let me 

assure you they take their duties deadly seriously. Let me also assure 

you that night-vision goggles are cool. Get a pair.3 

A lesson for us all 

2 

Take a lesson from the Chinese. We need to build a 2000-mile 

long wall along our southern border. This will have two benefits. 

First of all, when I’m worried I like to stay busy. Building a giant wall 

is a great way to keep the nation’s mind off how many immigrants 

enter the country through airports. Second, this wall might actually 

keep people out. If it’s built right, not like that picket fence the 

Russians threw up across Berlin. We don’t want these Mexican 

Jumping Beans hopping over whenever they feel like it. Make it tall. 

I mean tall enough that if you bake at the top of it, you’d need to use 

the high-altitude instructions.4 I’m talking about something that can

be seen from space, with double-wall construction, machine-gun 

nests and a flaming moat loaded with fireproof crocodiles. 

3  You want to end the swarm, take away the honey pot. 

Everybody says immigrants just do the jobs Americans don’t want 

to do, but let’s test that theory. They pick our fruits and vegetables. 

Who wouldn’t want to have a job that got them out in the fresh 

air more often? Hell, I pay twenty bucks a pop for the privilege of 

picking apples and pumpkins every October. And the hay ride is 

extra! 

184  3  SkyMall® has some great deals. 

4  And you’d better be baking an apple pie. 

I M M I G R A N T S  

If  we  really  want  to  get  rid  of  these  occupational  interlopers,  I  say  we  give 

them the jobs nobody wants to do. Here are a few American jobs that will have 

them packing their piñatas in no time: 

• 

Pottery Teacher: Feel like throwing yourself in front of a train? 

Throw a pot instead! The one word that will best describe your 

students is “desperate-middle-aged-woman-looking-for-a-creative-

outlet-after-the-divorce.” A word that won’t describe them, however, 

is “talented.” There are only so many ways of patiently asking “What  This was supposed to 

are you trying to make?” before you finally snap and use the kiln to 

be a plate.

cook a car battery. 

• 

• 

High School Guidance Counselor:5 You wake up every morning  
thinking “If I’m so good at finding careers, how did I end up with this  
one?” At least you’re not the Vice Principal. 

Bass Player: It’s like you made a poorly worded deal with the devil 
to be a rock star. Instead of fame, fortune and groupies, you stand  
in the shadows plucking one note for 90 minutes while the lead  
singer picks out a trio of coeds from the front row for a post-show  
pansexual trapeze act. Even worse, you’re expected to room with  
the drummer. 

Your groupies: 
Pottery students. 

USEFUL WORD:  Xenophobia, n., a fear of foreigners. Not a fear of Warrior 

Princesses.  (Note:  Not  crazy  about  Warrior  Princesses  either.  I  like  my 

damsels helpless and in a tower. Thanks, but I’ll do the fighting, gals.) 

I’M  NOT  A  MONSTER:  Let’s  face  it—people  in  other  countries  lead 

horrible, pointless lives filled with hardship and strange brand names for 

their snack crackers. 

5  My guidance counselor told me to follow my dreams, but it’s hard to get a job as a dragonfly. 

185 

CANARY IN A COAL MINE 

You will never hear me criticize the Statue of Liberty. You can’t get more 

American than her—that’s why the French gave her up. 

I can, however, criticize poetry. Just look at this item I saw in the 

New York Sun. 

Misprint Is Spied In Lazarus Poem At Liberty Island
 BY GARY SHAPIRO— Staff Reporter of the Sun 

December 8, 2006 

There appears to be an error on the bronze plaque inside the pedestal 
of the Statue of Liberty, inscribed with the famous sonnet “The New 
Colossus” by Emma Lazarus. 
Lazarus’s poem contains the immortal lines: “ ‘Give me your tired, 
your  poor,  /  Your  huddled  masses  yearning  to  breathe  free,  /  The 
wretched refuse of your teeming shore.’” Just prior to these lines on 
the  plaque  are  inscribed  the  following  lines:  “ ‘Keep  ancient  lands, 
your  storied  pomp!’  cries  she  /  With  silent  lips.”  But  in  the  hand-
written manuscript for a collection of poems that Lazarus compiled 
in 1886, a year before her death, the phrase “ancient lands” is set off 
by commas: “ ‘Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!’ ” 

Whatever  happened  to  the  old  adage,  “Copy  edit  twice,  cast  in  bronze 

once”? Now we’ve spent 120 years thinking our “pomp” should be keeping 

“ancient  lands,”  instead  of  “ancient  lands”  keeping  our  “pomp”!  That 

changes everything. 

Up till now, this poem has always been interpreted to mean that we should 

throw our arms wide open to every Dutch Boy who wants to paddle his 

bong across the Atlantic. 

But with the discovery of this error, who knows what in the hell Lazarus 

meant to say?  Maybe there are other manuscripts of the poem out there 

with all different punctuation.  Different words, even. 

There’s no certainty 

186 

The Old Colossus 

anymore whether this statue was intended to be welcoming to immigrants at all.  Maybe 

that torch isn’t meant to be a beacon, but a searchlight to make it easier for the INS to 

spot people sneaking over the border. 

I say, let’s use this opportunity to replace the error-filled, unverifiable and troublesome 

Lazarus  poem  with  something  a  little  more  in  tune  with  the  times. 

Something  that’s 

impossible to punctuate incorrectly. 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  FO R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

Woooo! Hey, remember me from the Sports Chapter? Chevron 

—The Gas with Techron! Shut up Deb, I know this guy. 

Anyway, I heard there was a job opening in this chapter, 

and frankly, I could use the work, what with all the Speedo 

Gonzaleses out in front of the Home Depot snatching up my 

construction jobs. 

Let me tell you what illegal immigration has done to us 

guys in drywall—Hold up. They’re doing the National Anthem. 

Deb, what are you doin’? You gotta stand up. Because it’s the 

fucking National Anthem, that’s why. Show some respect. 

Jesus fuck, Deb. 

The Guy Sitting Next 
to You At The Stadium 

glaaaare! Woooooooooooo! 

cares?! 

rosin bag of yours. 

O the ramparts we watched, were so gallingly streaming! And the rocket’s red 

The bomb bursting out there, came truth with the night that our hmm-hmm who 

Put your hand over your heart, Deb. Your heart. It’s the thumpy thing under that left 

O THE LAND OF THE FREEEEE!!! It’s go time! AND THE HOOOOME… OF 

THE… BRAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAVE! 

PLAY GODDAMN BALL! Let’s fucking DO this! WooooooHOOOOOOOOOO! 

You can sit down, Deb. 

Those guys down on the field, they gotta go out and earn it every day. Your average 

drops below .200, they kick your ass right down to the minors. Same with America. If 

we let our average go down too low, I mean our average of real Americans, we’ll end 

up like some minor league country, like Mexico or Guatelahala. That’s what chuffs me 

about foreigners. They’re bringin’ our stats down. 

Yo! Beer guy! Hey! Two beers here! Two apiece! Alright. Pass ’em this way. Keep 

’em moving, keep ’em moving. Hey dipshit! Want to get your thumb out of my brew? 

Deb, drink yours quick. We’ll do these now and then I’ll go pick up some more between 

innings. Chug-a-fuckin’-lug. 

Here’s the exception. See who we got pitching today? Gutierrez. Hell of an arm. 

He can throw a ball of fucking fire. He’s doing something positive for society. Hell, we 

should bring over his whole family on a raft and stick ’em right into Spring Training. 

WHAT!? Come ooooonnnnnn—I could see that was a strike from up here! Eat some 

carrots, ump! You weak-eyed pussy fag fuck! BOOOOOOOOOOOOOO! Come on, Deb. 

BOOOOOOOOOOO! That’s it, baby. 

Shit, yeah! That was a sweet grab. Right out of the vines. You know, couple years 

ago, I had my doubts about some of these Asian guys they brought over from the 

Orient. But that Matsumoto bastard is like a ninja in center field. He’d make a solid 

citizen. 

Popped him UP! Popped-him-the-fuck up! Nice inning. That’s what I like to see. Bing-

boop de-doop. Threeup, threedown. Way to go, Gutierrez! Give that man a green card! 

Be back with nachos. 

They were out of nachos, so I got four more beers. Hey Deb, what did I miss? 

Well you’d know if you weren’t yakkin’ on that phone all the time. Was it Trish? I just 

guessed. You talk to her every fucking second, Deb. I’m not thinkin’ about her, I just 

guessed. Jeez… 

Come on, Gutierrez! Just like last inning—three up, three down! You the man! You 

the…Oh shit. Go foul…No…GO FOUL! Go the FUCK foul! God Dammit! 

Hey, GUTIERREZ! Go back to Mexico, YOU PUSSY-ARMED CHILI-SHITTIN’ FUCK! 

Who they puttin’ in? Sanchez? Alright! A Dominican. Those guys can play. 

Let’s fucking do this, amigo! Woooooooooooooooooo! 

FUN 

ZONE 

What does America need to help protect her porous borders from illegal immigrants? 

Connect the dots to find the answer. 

fig 16. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

C HAPT ER 1 4 

S C I EN C E 

 “She blinded me with science.” 
–Thomas Dolby, unable to find scientific formula for follow-up hit   

IF

I  MAY  QUOTE  MYSELF:  REALITY 

HAS  A  WELL-KNOWN  LIBERAL 

BIAS.  AND WHO CAN YOU DEPEND 

ON  TO  KOWTOW  TO  REALITY  LIKE 

IT’S  THE  ONLY  GAME  IN  TOWN?  SCIENTISTS.  THEY  DO 

IT  RELIGIOUSLY.  WITH  THEIR  FANATICAL  DEVOTION, 

Like Eve, Newton 
offended God with 
an apple. 

SCIENTISTS  ARE  NO  BETTER  THAN  CULT  MEMBERS— 

only difference is that they put their blind faith in empirical observation instead 

of in a drifter who marries 14-year-olds and declares himself the reincarnation 

of Ramses II. 

Now, I have nothing against observation per se. Looking at things is one of my 

great  talents.  In  fact,  as  vice  president  of  my  Neighborhood  Crime  Watch,  I 

personally witnessed a young couple attempt to paint their house a color not 

approved by the Home Owners’ Association. Thanks to my observation and 

flier campaign, their gracious home is now a beautiful Mannered Taupe. 

But scientists use observation in a different way: to draw conclusions about 

the way reality works. They look at the world and ask questions about it. Only 

 “Why am I so lonely?” 

problem, we weren’t put on this planet to question our environment, we were 

put here to process it into fuel for our cars. 

191 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Kill two birds: add 
fabric softener and 
rat poison. 

You see, like a load of dirty laundry spontaneously generates rats, questions 

spontaneously  generate  data  and  facts.  And  trust  me:  I  wouldn’t  italicize 

these things if I didn’t believe they were dangerous. It’s not like I’m looking 

for extra work. 

Just take a look at history. Over the centuries, scientific evidence has viciously 

attacked the status quo. There’s a reason we have a status quo: It ensures that 

the status of our lives is consistent so we can meet our quotas. When 18th-

century scientist Edward Jenner discovered that parents could protect their 

children from smallpox with a vaccine, it may have saved a few thousand lives, 

but it also destroyed the magic amulet industry. 

Science attacks our most cherished opinions. Opinions which come straight 

from  our  collective  gut.  Oh,  wait,  according  to  gastroenterologists,  the  only 

thing that comes from the gut is waste left from the digestion of food. That’s 

right, “waste.” I guess that means that scientists literally think our opinions 

should be flushed down the toilet! 

Well, I’m not flushing and neither should you! In the last few centuries science 

has made some giant strides in our understanding of the world, but it’s time to 

turn back the clock. Speaking of clocks, how about we stop letting the earth’s 

rotation dictate what time it is? I say it’s Morning in America!2 

“METHOD?” OR MADNESS? 3 

Bunsen burnouts 

When it comes to understanding the universe, the Beaker Brigade won’t shut 

up about its method of inquiry, The Scientific Method. 

4

This process consists of several basic steps, including but not limited to—I’m 

sorry, I blacked out there. Suffice it to say, there are a bunch of steps. Put on a 

Café Americano 

pot of coffee. This might take a while. 

Step 1: Observation: “Mankind has a pretty nice relationship with God.” 

Step 2: Hypothesis: “I bet people would start to doubt the existence of God 

if I claimed that the Earth revolves around the Sun, 

instead of the other way around like the Bible says.” 

192  2 It doesn’t feel like we’re rotating. 

3 Answer: Madness. 
4 Only good method: rhythm. 

S C I E N C E  

Step 3: Experiment: “ I will publish my heretical beliefs and see how the 

Church reacts.” 

Step 4: Conclusion: “I recant! Please stop torturing me!!!” 

Sorry—“Enhanced 
Interrogating” me 

A BETTER WAY 

It’s natural to be curious about our world, but the scientific method is just one 

theory about how to best understand it. We live in a democracy, which means 

Just don’t be curious 
about your body. 

that we should treat every theory equally. 

So here’s an alternative two-step method for understanding the universe: 

Step 1: Remember: Six thousand years ago, God created the  

Heavens and the Earth. 

Step 2: Repeat as necessary. 

Step 3? Repent as 
necessary. 

Isn’t  that  a  whole  lot  easier  than  analyzing  electromagnetic  background  for 

evidence of some “Big Bang” fourteen billion years ago? Fourteen billion is a 

pretty big number, and God didn’t create us so we could waste time trying to 

picture fourteen billion cupcakes. (DON’T TRY THIS!) 

One… two… aaargh! 

MOVING  ON:  That  about  covers  science,  but  what  about  the  folks  who 

practice this crackpot doctrine? I spend a lot of time with scientists (about 6 

minutes with each one that comes on my show), and I can honestly say that 

despite appearances, most of them are decent, well-intentioned people. They’re 

just  dangerously  deluded.  It’s  easy  to  see  how  they  get  sucked  in.  They’re 

However, Neil DeGrasse 
Tyson is an absolute 
monster. 

physically awkward and lonely, so they spent their adolescence down by the 

creek studying the creatures that live there. “I may be ridiculed at school,” they 

think, “but a crayfish would never judge me.”5 

So  my  heart  goes  out  to  them.  Figuratively.  I  would  never  actually  entrust 

my heart to scientists—they’d probably implant it in a baboon. And a baboon 

with my heart would be practically unstoppable. Baboon strength and agility 

combined with my determination and media savvy? It would be a threat to all 

of humanity.6 

But a baboon with 
my hair would make 
a handsome pet. 

5  Wrong! If that crayfish had bigger claws, it would pants you in a second. 
6  Not to mention baboonity. 

193 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

ELITE E-LERT: Scientists claim that the earth is four billion years old. Yet 

they still can’t explain many of the enduring mysteries of the universe. Hey, 

scientists, if you’re so smart, why do you need more than four billion years 

to figure stuff out? 

NO  HEROES  ALLOWED: I’ve said it before (see above), science is elitist. 

Making rules, setting boundaries, constantly telling us what is and isn’t flam-

mable7—all without input from the very people who are expected to abide by 

those laws. I know I never consented to Gravity Without Representation. 

So who gave some lab-coated pipette wielder permission to act like he knows 

more  than  I  do  about  mitochondria,  just  because  he  spent  twenty  years  of 

his life studying them in a laboratory? PhDs and 300-page dissertations don’t 

make his opinion any more valid. I happen to have some mitochondria myself, 

Furthermore,  why  should  I  care  that  four  out  of  five  dentists  recommend 

Crest? What qualifies some fluoride-pusher to call the shots when it comes to 

my oral hygiene? A diploma from Dental Camp? 

The point is, no one is more qualified to tell me what the world means to me, 

than me. And don’t think you’re any different: No one is more qualified to tell 

you what the world means to you than me. 

So  I’ve  prepared  an  itemized  and  exhaustive  list  of  my  thoughts  on  various 

scientific disciplines. You won’t find these opinions in any textbook, unless it 

happens to be one I’ve defaced. 

Mytochondria! 

and I can tell you that mine don’t take their marching orders from Cal Tech. 

194  7 If I believe washer fluid is a sports drink, that’s my business. 

S C I E N C E  

SCIENCE GLOSSARY 

A glossar-Me, 
if you will 

A 

Aerospace 

Alchemy 

Aerospace is the science of making planes go faster. Here’s my problem with 

it: I always fly First Class. Why would I want the trip over sooner? 

There are some amazing things that people have simply given up on: radio 

dramas, elevator operators, and the transmutation of lead into gold. I don’t 

understand it. Nobody needs lead anymore except X-Ray technicians. Why 

aren’t we turning more of it into gold? We must make this a priority. Think of 

the benefits to society. One example: Run-down tenements in America are full 

of lead-based paint. With a little alchemy, not only will those homes no longer 

Yet we turn 
dinosaurs into oil? 

be health hazards, they will be gorgeous. 

Astrology 

I’ll get behind any field that promises to both tell the future and promote last-

minute grocery-line commerce. Plus, anyone who’s been universally rejected 

by mainstream science must be doing something right. 

Here’s a little horoscope I prepared for my fellow Tauruses: 

TAURUS (4/20 – 5/20)—A risky venture yields exceptional profits. 

Heed the words of a superior authority, and prosperity will follow. 

…in bed. 

Sounds too good to be true, I know. But it’s all right there in the alignment of 

Mercury. And it’s such a funny coincidence, because I was about to propose 

that everyone buy five extra copies of my book as gifts so others can reap the 

profits of my words. Huh. The Universe truly works in mysterious ways. 

195 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

SCIENCE GLOSSARY 

Astronomy 

This science became obsolete as soon as they named all the constellations. 

These days all astronomers do is sit around reclassifying Pluto and faking 

moon landings. We need maybe two of them to keep an eye on the black hole 

Study these stars. 

at the center of the galaxy; let the rest go. 

Or, if you want to do something useful, astronomers, how about some new 

constellations? Nobody cares about Caelum. Or this one: 

It’s a little triangle. Its name? Triangulum. Did we really 

need an ancient Greek to tell us that? And how ’bout… 

Fig. 1.  T R I A N G U L U M  

Fornax. It’s two stars. Since “Fornax” isn’t Greek for 

the “Line,” there is no excuse for this thing. And it’s next to 

Eridanus, the “River.” For Zeus’ sake! Constellations were 

supposed to help with navigation. The River is not going 

to help with navigation. Any stars could form a river! Pick 

Fig. 2.  F O R N A X  

any ten stars, draw a line through them. Pow! River. 

So let’s take some of these constellations make something we care about. 

Here’s how you do it: 

196 

B

Botany

C

Cloning

D

DNA

S C I E N C E

SCIENCE GLOSSARY

This is actually a very hot science. You think that, since it’s all about flowers, 

it’s literally a pansy science. But botany isn’t just flowers—it’s mostly about 

breeding and crossbreeding flowers. That’s right—flower sex. Graphic 

stamen-on-pistil action. This is the hardcore birds-and-bees stuff. I will 

tell you this: If you meet a botanist in a bar, chances are she is ready to go. 

Botany? More like Hotany™.

Cloning has got to be the dumbest idea in history. Have scientists never 

Next to History

watched a single movie in their lives? Clones live to do one of three things: 

replace us so that no one notices except our girlfriend whose suspicions are 

slowly aroused, until she becomes a target in the clone’s deadly game; rebel 

against us, demanding equal rights; or attack us, like in Attack of the Clones,

which I didn’t actually see. No free labor source is worth all of this trouble.

Still torn on ape 
labor. We should be 
able to quell their 
uprising.

There are some who claim that DNA is an instruction manual for all living cells. 

But if IKEA has taught me anything, it’s that I don’t need instructions. My coffee 

table works just fine, provided I remember to attach the counterweights.8

  But the nerd patrollers claim that hereditary traits are determined by genes 

on the DNA, as shown below. 

Brown Hair

I said below. 
Why are you looking 
over here?

Oil-free forehead

American Catholic

Big hands…if you know 
what I’m talking about

Fear of mummies

8  IKEA, give your products American names.  I don’t want to buy anything called a “Ramvik Svalov.”

197

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

SCIENCE GLOSSARY 

Well, I don’t buy it. God and back-alley cosmetic surgery determine what 

I look like, not some no-good nucleotides linked together in a ladder-like 

shape twisted into a spiral. Just one more reason I don’t trust ladders. If God 

wanted me to reach something, He would have given me Go-Go Gadget arms. 

Every night I pray for 
a giraffe-neck.  But 
it’s not in God’s plan. 

E 

Evolution 

I’m thinking about it 
right now. 

To put it simply, evolution is an affront to God. Anyone who believes in it will 

burn in eternal hellfire, probably while being prodded by flaming chimpan-

zees with razor-sharp bananas. 

Evolutionists’ main claim is that one day we decided to stop being 

monkeys and turned ourselves into humans. Well, if that’s true, why aren’t 

more monkeys escaping from zoos? Think about it. They could turn into 

humans, then disguise themselves as janitors and walk out of their cages. But 

I guess evolution doesn’t have an answer for that one. 

The main perpetrator of this monkey lie is Charles Darwin. He wrote all 

about it in his 1859 book The Origin of Species. He claims to have developed 

this “theory” after studying “finches” on the Galapagos “Islands,” but I can 

guess why he really came up with it. He was on the Galapagos Islands for 

Spring Break, got smashed, woke up in bed next to a monkey, and then had to 

come up with a theory that made it all okay. 

I used to be pro-Fahrenheit—after all, it’s the American way of measuring heat. 

That is, until I learned it was named after some Dutch guy. Sorry, but I don’t 

want my thermometer taking orders from some Amsterdam stoner who got 

bonged out of his mind one night and started messing around with mercury. 

“Dude, it’s like I can  
see the temperature!” 

Hydrogen Fuel Cells 

Two words: Hindenburg. Think how amazing it would be if cars did that! 

It certainly would cut down on fender benders. I’m pro. 

F 

Fahrenheit 

H 

198 

S C I E N C E  

SCIENCE GLOSSARY 

The study of reptiles and amphibians. Affects one out of six Americans. 

Herpetology 

G 

Geology 

I 

Ichthyology 

J 

Jumble 

The last thing I need is a bunch of dust-covered fossil sweepers telling me that 

the Earth is four billion years old. “Carbon dating?” Just palm reading for rocks. 

That said, Geodes are pretty. 

Shiny 

Global Warming 

Validated by the free market when Al Gore’s movie, An Inconvenient Truth, 

became a box-office smash. But let’s not get carried away, America. Granted 

the temperature’s steadily increasing, but I’ve been taking some measure-

ments of my own, and the degree to which I care about the Harp seal is still 

holding steady at “way less than I care about my Audi A8.”9 

Important: 
Is it F-H-G or F-G-H? 
Remember to ask 
editor. 

I have never been able to get beyond the basic contradiction of ichthyology: 

It is the study of fish. Yet the science starts with “Ick,” which is a form of 

scale rot that killed my Black Mollies. Killing fish is not what I call a science. 

It’s what I call fishing. 

I don’t know how many scientists it takes to so precisely scramble those 

words every day, but I’m grateful. Great way to sharpen the old noodle over 

the morning toast. 

They’re so 
knifgcu dhra. 

9 My A8 actually has 10 cyninders. The last two just heat the bread warmer in my glove compartment. Mmm.  199 
Warm buscuits at 80 mph. 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

SCIENCE GLOSSARY 

K 

Kites 

See “Magic,” below. 

L 

Liposuction 

I’m saying. 

M 

Magic 

Science has knocked this one out of the park. Throughout human history, we 

have dreamed of reaching the rich fat deposits locked tantalizingly beneath 

our skin. Now, with a scalpel, a plastic tube, and a household vacuum cleaner 

(I recommend the Orick 8lb. upright), that bounty is finally ours. Industrial 

lubricant, artificial fattener—the applications are endless. This is a science 

I can get behind. Plus it makes ladies easier to get behind, if you know what 

My all-time favorite kind of science. It’s mystical, entertaining, and you never 

know what’s going to happen next. A physicist will tell you, “It’s impossible 

for that rabbit to be transported across the room into that hat.” But a magic 

By the way, still 
waiting to get my 
rabbit back. 

scientist will get it done. 

The only problem I have with magic scientists is that they are not as forth-

coming with information as some other scientists. If you meet a chemist in a 

bar, you can’t get them to shut up about how to make different compounds 

out of common cleaning agents under your sink. 

Magic also has a much more practical application than the other sciences. 

I saw a magic scientist make an airplane disappear on TV. If we can move 

enough of those scientists onto the battlefield, imagine our army’s easy 

victories as each enemy pilot sits on the ground, blinking in surprise that 

Where does it say 
you can’t make a 
cape in camouflage? 

there’s no plane around him anymore! 

200 

S C I E N C E  

SCIENCE GLOSSARY 

N 

Nephrology 

O 

Ornithology 

Nephrology is the study of kidneys. Kidneys! What will they think of next? 

Livers? 

I can’t see why you’d bother studying birds generally when we still don’t 

know everything there is to know about eagles. What do I care about the 

mating habits of a sparrow, or the neurological impulses underlying catbird 

sub-song development? One dive, and an eagle could turn those warblers into 

a cloud of feathery mulch. I say let’s put ornithology on hold until we have the 

technology to communicate with eagles, so we can convince them to pull us 

I have Feathery 
Mulch’s first album 
on vinyl around here 
somewhere… 

around the sky in air-sleds. 

Oceanography 

As longtime viewers know, I’ve never trusted the sea. What’s it hiding under 

there? I fully support this science, not only to figure out what’s down there, 

There be monsters. 

but to develop weapons to destroy it before it destroys us. Think I’m crazy? 

Just take a peep at an angler fish sometime. These monsters look like the 

offspring of a sea bass and a bear trap, and growing smack in the middle of 

their skulls is a curved rod dangling a juicy chunk of bioluminescent flesh. 

That’s right. They’re fishing for us. Oceanographers, America’s safety is in 

your hands. Get to work on the submersible deep-fat fryer. 

P 

Physics 

Some say this science is fundamental; I say it’s a bunch of unnecessary 

regulations. Physics is the ultimate Big Government interference—universal 

laws meant to constrain us at every turn. No staying in motion if acted on by 

a net force. No thermodynamic systems without entropy. Hey, is it wrong that 

I sometimes want to act without having to deal with an equal and opposite 

reaction? Honey, are you listening? These laws just keep us from reaching our 

On the plus side: 
Nukes 

201 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

SCIENCE GLOSSARY 

full potential as flying, time-traveling, teleporting clusters of energy. We’d be 

a lot better off if we took physics off the books and just let the free market 

decide what was possible for matter. E=mc2? Everything=my choice2! 

Psychology 

My theory is that this science was invented by someone with a leather couch 

and a strong desire not to go to medical school. Really? I’m supposed to sit 

down and tell you all my problems, and then at the end of the hour all I get 

for my time and my $300 is you telling me “We’re making progress, I’ll see you 

next week”? If I drop that kind of scratch for a doctor, I’d better be leaving 

with some heavy-duty drugs and a tantalizing instruction not to mix them 

Psychiatry 

Psychology with balls. And a prescription pad. 

Periodic Table 

First off, way to rip off the United States, science. Look familiar? 

Whatever Nick Nolte 
is taking 

with them alcohol. 

Second, what’s with all the letters? Gold is Au? Welcome to America— 

speak English! Those letters have to be a code for something, and I think 

I’ve cracked it. Check out the hidden message I found in the Periodic 

“Feel tepid, celibate  Anagram of Elements. 
morons!” 

202 

S C I E N C E  

SCIENCE GLOSSARY 

SECRET MESSAGE 

Satan here. Congratulations! You broke code. Here are instructions. 

Scientists: Assault faith, drain values. 

Gays: Keep up sex. 

Yours, 

Satan 

That’s using every letter of the Periodic Table. With only these left over: 

BCCOMFCCZGBTKAABZBMCGCBCBHFWRPHGALPBBPRNNFRRLRRFDA 

SBGBHHIMDSRGBUUUQUUPUUHOEGUUSUURLRCDPRNDPMTSMUGDB 

DYHRMYBCHPUNPPUMCMBLKMCHFSFMMDN! 

To my knowledge, there are no sciences that begin with the letter “Q.” 

Let’s try to keep it that way. 

I don’t think I need to rehash this subject here, given that I have written an 

entire chapter devoted to the dangers of this technology and its imminent 

takeover. (See Chapter 18: Yes Iron Master! How to Serve Their Needs and 

Q 

R 

Robots 

Keep Your Job!) 

S 

Stem Cells 

This seems like an OK idea. I used to watch Star Trek, and when someone 

broke their leg, Dr. McCoy just held a little whirring medical device over 

them, and the leg healed right up. I am fairly sure that device used stem cells 

somehow. From what I’ve heard about how they work, that sounds right. 

However, on Star Trek they never showed any of the abortions that powered 

that device. So I’m hoping they found another source of stem cells. Jury’s out 

on this one. 

203 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

SCIENCE GLOSSARY 

T 

Techronology 

As in Chevron, the gas with Techron! This exciting field is bringing gasoline 

performance to new heights. But the innovators working in Techronology 

believe in more than just keeping cars happy and performing at their best 

by maximizing the cleaning power of all octane grades; they’re investing in 

human energy. Thanks to their hard work, Chevron was the first American 

gasoline company to have its product labeled a TOP TIER Gasoline. As we 

speak, Techronologists are making unprecedented advances in cleaning 

intake system deposits while controlling combustion deposits. Remember, 

Still waiting for that 
check to clear, guys. 

your valves are a temple—fill them with Techron! 

This is pee science. Dirty stuff, but I guess it takes all types. 

I’m Stephen Colbert! 

Who am I to judge? 

I’m not crazy about the fact that vitamins are teaching kids the alphabet. 

Vitamin A, B6, B12? Cereal boxes should be for taking the Rabbit through the 

I’m not good at 
swallowing pills. 

maze to get his Trix, not about reading lessons. 

Plus, vitamin C? If I want to avoid scurvy, I’ll eat sauerkraut with the rest 

God said so. 

This is the question that scientists are always asking. You know who else 

asks that? Five-year-olds. Shows you the kind of mental development we’re 

dealing with here, folks. 

U 

Urology 

V 

Vitamins 

of the crew. 

W 

Why? 

204 

S C I E N C E  

SCIENCE GLOSSARY 

X 

X-Rays 

X-Rays are elitist. You have to be a doctor in order to use them. Well, maybe 

I want to take a look at my bones not because they’re broken—just because 

they’re pretty. No dice. They won’t ship a machine to your house. 

I finally managed to find a source who knows a guy who got me some 

X-Ray glasses. But they only work on my hand, and even then only in good 

light. Very disappointing. You know those X-Ray doctors are looking through 

girls’ clothes all the time. 

Y 

Y-Chromosomes 

The Y-chromosome is provided by the father and determines if the baby 

will be a manchild. Here’s a no-fail way to make sure your baby is a boy: 

Put yourself in a centrifuge right before lovemaking. The spinning sends the 

weaker girl chromosomes flying to the back of the scrotum, while the boy 

chromosomes hold their positions. This leaves them right up front, ready 

to lead the charge. Little-known madeup fact: This is why, at carnivals, the 

Spinner ride is always right next to the Tunnel of Love. 

Oh, so Joni Mitchell is a scientist now? 

Yodeling 

Z 

Zoology 

One would think, “A school of study dedicated to locking up animals in cages 

so that we can throw popcorn at them—finally, a noble science.” Not neces-

I saw a Twilight 
Zone where people 
were in the zoo. Can 
that happen? 

sarily the case. While zoologists undoubtedly do good work toward establishing 

our dominance over the animals (see Chapter 2, “Animals”), a surprising 

amount of zoologists’ time is spent thinking of ways for pandas to get off. I say, 

no more funding for Sing-Sing to play with Ling-Ling’s thing-thing.10 

10 Until she sees the ring-ring. 

205 

STEPHEN SPEAKS FOR ME 

A  C H A N C E  FO R  AV E R AG E  A M E R I C A N S  TO  AG R E E  W I T H  W H AT  I  T H I N K  

I think it’s time for an actual scientist to weigh in on this 

debate. I wish I had nicer things to say about the Scientific 

Establishment, but I’ve met some pretty closed minds in 

academia. “Publish or perish,” as they say, and I have yet to find 

any journal with the courage to print my research paper, “The 

Method and Practice of Sucking a Hard-Boiled Egg into a Milk 

Bottle.”  How does the hard-boiled egg get in the bottle without 

breaking?  I don’t know.  But give me some grant money, and I 

can solve this mystery of our Natural World.  

Or would you rather see me cook a hot dog with two nails 

and a frayed electrical cord?  I thought so.  Cover your eyes, 

Professor Wonder 
Scientist 

to be revealed. 

esis: It’s thrilling! 

because sometimes the wiener will explode! Why? Another of Nature’s Secrets waiting 

And there’s so much more to discover! Like the fundamental chemical structure of 

flaming bouncy balls made of borax, rubber cement, and kerosene.  I have a hypoth-

But the Gatekeepers of Knowledge don’t care about bringing a little joy into the lab.  

They’re too timid to plumb these mysteries. They’d rather decode genetic sequences 

and calculate the number of dimensions coiled within a superstring. 

Meanwhile, do you know what happens when you submerge flashlight batteries in a 

vat of bleach and then place it over a Bunsen burner?  Me neither. But isn’t it science’s 

responsibility to ask these hard questions?! Shouldn’t we at least try?!  I can’t say for 

sure what the results will be other than spectacular! 

In closing, thank you for calling the Wonder-torium! If you would like to book the 

Hall of Experi-mazement for your child’s birthday party, please leave your name and 

number at the beep. 

Somehow, this machine will record it! 

Beep! 

FUN 

ZONE 

Hey, Kids! Now you can disprove evolution

in your own backyard! 

Here’s what you’ll need: 

One (1) 
fishbowl 

One (1) 
pitcher of water 

One (1) 
hamster, alive 

One (1) 
hardbound copy, 
Charles Darwin’s 
Origin of Species 

…and now here’s the experiment! 

DISCLAIMER: The following demonstration is for educational purposes 

only, in the sense that you will “only” become “educated” by doing it.  

In other 

words: Don’t try this at home. (Try it at a PETA rally.)  

Step 1:  Fill your fishbowl with the water. 

I don’t want to give anything away, 

but soon it’s going to be a bowl for another kind of animal. 

Step 2:  Drop the hamster (you can call it “Skip”) into the fishbowl. 

Step 3:  Cover the fishbowl with 

Charles Darwin’s 

Origin of Species. 

Step 4:  Seems like a pretty desperate situation Skip has gotten himself into. 

This would be an ideal time for evolution to kick in! 

Step 5:  Follow the Scientific Method—observe! Is the hamster “evolving” 

gills? Has he “evolved” a jackhammer to drill through the fishbowl, or 

“adapted to his environment” with a tiny hamster flamethrower to burn 

through Origin of Species

? Didn’t think so. 

Step 6: Let the hamster go. Just because Darwin was a sick twist with a God 

Complex doesn’t mean we have to buy into his power trip. 

(You could also call the hamster “Teddy.”) 

fig 17. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

A  NOTE  TO THE F UTURE 
WARNING! DO NOT READ UNTIL THE FUTURE 

Dear Reader, 

I know this book will still be read hundreds of years from now, just like Dante’s 

The  Divine  Comedy,  or  Cardinal  Bouef’s  1534  masterpiece,  Phyfick  ofe  the 

Conftitutionef of Varying Warwickfhire Proftitutef, a ftudie. And I wouldn’t 

want my future readers to think this book was intended only for those living in 

my own times. Obviously, I can’t know what will happen in the future, but just 

because something is unknowable, that doesn’t mean I don’t have some strong 

opinions  about  it.  And  just  to  cover  my  bases,  I  have  weighed  in  on  several 

different  scenarios.  Make  sure  to  read  only  the  section  corresponding  to  the 

particular future in which you are living and/or being harvested for your organs 

by our alien overlords. 

So for all the generations of The Colbert Nation to come, I present my future 

opinions, preserved in this book that has been specially manufactured to survive 

a nuclear holocaust, so long as that holocaust does not involve fire, excessive 

moisture, or tearing. 

LEGAL DISCLAIMER: If Christ returns and Raptures the True Believers 

unto Heaven, all of what follows is moot. 

A FUTURE WHERE THE WORLD IS RULED BY DAMNED, DIRTY APES 

Right off the bat, please introduce them to pants. 

Second, what the hell happened? Apes? Last time I checked apes were in cages 

and humans were their masters. I can only assume that an ape became Mayor of 

San Francisco. Before you knew it apes were in control of Congress, then you 

had an Ape President and an Ape Secretary General of the UN. Does an ape host 

my old show? 

passes. 

Shame  on  you,  future  society.  We  left  you  a  perfectly  good  human-animal 

hierarchy and you blew it. Please DO NOT defrost my head until this ape thing 

209 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

A FUTURE WHERE I AM WORSHIPPED AS A GOD 

Well, that got blown out of proportion! But since all of civilization has reoriented 

itself around me as the Supreme Deity, best not to rock the boat. 

You’re lucky to have this book as your one and only scripture. Every word of it 

is the revealed Truth, so interpret it literally. Including the typos. I put those in 

here for a reason—a mysterious reason that I know, but you don’t. It should give 

you great comfort that I will tell you the reason after you die. I promise. 

A FUTURE WHERE ROBOTS BECOME SELF-AWARE AND ENSLAVE HUMANKIND 

Hey, Robot! Congratulations on the utter subjugation of the carbon based crea-

tures following the Great Purge. 

Here’s a proclamation I want you to broadcast through your Hivemind to your 

android brethren: 

The next sentence is false. 

The previous sentence is true. 

I’ll wait while your heads explode.  
Now, to the human who has picked up this book in wonderment, having pried  
it from the still-clenched hands of the Iron Master who just self-destructed:  

You’re welcome.  

If you want to worship me as your God, I’ll understand. (See Above.) 

A FUTURE WHERE THEY’RE STILL PLAYING PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL 

Here are my Super Bowl Predictions: 

2008  Minnesota Vikings 24, Indianapolis Colts 14 

2009 

St. Louis Rams 42, Pittsburgh Steelers 35 

2010  Miami Dolphins 17, Washington Redskins 12 

2011  Miami Dolphins 35, New Orleans Saints 0 

2012  Miami Dolphins 78, Dallas Cowboys 0 

2013  Miami Dolphins 254, Dallas Cowboys 0 

2014  Miami Dolphins 3,340, Dallas Cowboys 0 1 

2015 

2016 

Dallas Cowboys 21, New England Patriots 17 2 

Florida Jaguars 31, Arizona Cardinals 9 

210  1 Just for the record, this game was a lot closer than the score indicates. 
2  First Super Bowl following UN-mandated execution of Miami Dolphins 

A   N O T E   T O   T H E   F U T U R E  

2017 

2018 

2019 

2020 

2021 

2022 

2023 

2024 

2025 

Arizona Cardinals 21, Baghdad Tigers 12 

Kansas City Chiefs 27, San Francisco Sodomites 17 

(Super Bowl cancelled) 

North America Survivors 26, Southern Wastelands 14 

North America Survivors 27, EuroNordic Alliance 26 (OT) 

(Super Bowl cancelled) 

(Super Bowl cancelled) 

Sector B5 Meta-Creatures 52, Human Playthings 7 

Sector B5 Meta-Creatures 64, Human Playthings 0 

2026  Miami Dolphins 45, Sector B5 Meta-Creatures 14 3 

INSTRUCTIONS ON DEFROSTING MY HEAD 

Defrosting isn’t as easy as you’d think. 

The best way to defrost my head is simply to move it from the cryogenic freezer 

to a refrigerator. Make sure you place my head in a pan at least two inches 

deep; you’re going to want to catch all my juices. 

If you want my head up and shouting sooner, then place my head in a big pot 

full of cold water. Allow a half an hour of soaking time per pound of head until 

thawing  is  complete.  Replace  the  water  every  half  hour  and  make  sure  my 

head is in a leak-proof package because brain tissue can absorb moisture and 

become mushy. 

It’s also possible to defrost my head in the microwave. Set the power to low-

medium for six minutes per pound, rotating my head occasionally. 

DO  NOT  thaw  my  head  by  leaving  it  out  overnight  in  a  room-temperature 

environment  (like  a  picnic  cooler).  I  will  become  susceptible  to  contamina-

tion by bacteria like salmonella or something. Do not let me be contaminated 

with salmonella or something, because when you reattach me to that prisoner’s 

body, I will be angry! 

Looking forward to seeing you, 

Dr. Stephen T. Colbert, DFA 

3  In my opinion, the Miami Dolphins should have been reanimated a few years earlier, but hey, I’m not the 

211 

Pan-Galactic Sporting Commissioner. 

fig 18. S T E P H E N   C O L B E R T  

W HAT   H AV E  WE 
LEARNED? 

WHAT 

HAVE  WE  LEARNED?  THAT’S  THE 

WRONG QUESTION. WE HAVEN’T 

LEARNED ANYTHING. YOU LEARNED. 

I  ALREADY  KNOW  EVERYTHING  IN 

THIS BOOK, OR I COULDN’T POSSIBLY HAVE WRITTEN IT. 

DON’T MAKE THIS ABOUT ME. YOU ALWAYS DO THAT. IT’S 

ABOUT YOU AND WHAT YOU’VE LEARNED FROM  ME. 

But make no mistake—my book isn’t a monologue; it’s a dialogue—a dialogue 

between me and my opinions, and you’ve been welcomed to eavesdrop on us. 

Just a glance back at the Table of Contents should give you a pretty good idea 

of those things about which you didn’t know my opinions before you read the 

book, which you know now. 

You’ve learned about the forces aligned to destroy America—whether they be 

terrorists, environmentalists, or Kashi brand breakfast cereals. You’ve learned 

how  to  detect  left-wing  media  bias  by  looking  at  the  media  and  saying  “It’s 

biased.”  You’ve  learned  that  my  dog’s  name  is  Gipper.  What’s  more,  you’ve 

learned many things that will anger you when they are left out or altered in the 

eventual movie adaptation of this book. 

213 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

And  there’s  so  much  more.  In  fact,  however  carefully  you’ve  just  read  this 

book, there are sure to be lessons within it that you’ve yet to fully compre-

hend. That’s why you should buy a fresh copy and read it again. The smell and 

feel of a new book is part of the lesson. 

And remember, just because you bought this book, doesn’t mean you shouldn’t 

buy the audio book. There are some things that simply cannot be conveyed in 

print. Inflection, for instance. 

Plus, I’m working on a quote-a-day calendar (as well as an audio quote-a-day 

calendar). There’s a lot of repurposing of content yet to be done, believe me! 

I’m  certain  that  each  of  these  products  will  become  a  valuable  tool  in  your 

social  justice  toolbox,  and  each  will  probably  feature  a  small  amount  of 

original bonus material. 

FROM HERE, TO WHERE NOW, DO WE GO? 

This  is  where  you  come  in.  You  need  to  take  the  lessons  of  this  book  and 

apply them in your community—at the ballot box, at your local School Board 

meeting,  when  you’re  crossing  a  picket  line,  when  you’re  volunteering  your 

time  and  firearms  at  a  Texas  border  fence.  Heck,  there’s  no  reason  not  to 

try cold-calling random people out of the phone book and telling them what 

you’ve learned. (If they’re not home, leave a long message—maybe the chapter 

on The Media?) 

Once you’re armed with my knowledge, you should never again be afraid to 

speak up. For the more you speak up, the louder you become. And the more 

you speak up in my voice, the louder I become. If someone has a problem with 

it, just say, “Well, it’s not just my opinion, it’s Stephen Colbert’s opinion, and I 

happen to agree.” Then it’s two against one, and we win. 

I promise to hold up my end of the bargain. I will continue to bring you the best 

my gut has to offer via my hit television broadcast, The Colbert Report. I will 

continue to make a wide variety of products available at my website that will 

help you to spread our message of me. 

214 

W H A  T   H A  V E   W E   L E A R N E D ?  

Well,  you’ve  reached  the  end  of  this  book.  If  you  read  it  hard  enough,  you 

should now be hearing my voice in your head. Put down the book for a second. 

Can you still hear me? Don’t be afraid to answer out loud. I can hear you, too. 

Good. 

You should also be seeing my thoughts in the margins of other books. I know in 

the introduction I said not to make a habit out of reading, but just like the main 

character in any truly great novel/autobiography, at the end, I’ve found myself 

a changed man. I’ve come to realize that my biggest problem with other books 

was simply that I didn’t write them. 

Stay  strong.  Be  brave.  Share  (newly  bought  copies  of)  this  book  with  your 

friends  and  family.  You’ll  be  glad  you  did.  And  more  importantly,  so  will  I. 

Because after all: 

I Am America (And So Can You!) 

And you can take that to the bank. I know I will. 

Amen. 

215 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

HOW TO RETIRE 
I AM AMERICA (And So Can You!) 
FOR THE EVEN ING 

To properly close my book, begin by holding I Am America waist-high with 
another person so that Section A, my cover image, is parallel to the ground. 

Step 1 

216 

H O W   T O   R E T I R E   T H I S   B O O K  

Step 2 
Fold the upper half of the cover, Section A, lengthwise over the field of text,  
Section B, holding the bottom portion, Section C, and edges, Section D,  
securely.   

Step 3 

Gently bring Section A to rest upon Section B and Section C being careful to 
support book from underside, or back cover, Section E. If executed correctly, 
the cover image should now be facing upwards. The book may now be put 
down. See you tomorrow! 

217 

AP PEND IX 

THE W HITE HO US E 
CORRESPONDENTS ’ DINNE R 

Wherever I go, from P. Diddy’s annual White Party to 
Hollywood  premieres  to  the  men’s  room  at  Sharper 
Image, I meet Heroes.1 And they all want to know the 
same  thing:  “What  was  it  like  to  be  you,  Stephen  T. 
Colbert,  at  the  2006  White  House  Correspondents’ 
Dinner?” This is for them. 

It  was  an  average  Thursday  afternoon  at  The  Report.  I  was  making  minor 

repairs to my power massage recliner when the phone rang. 

“Colbert. Go.”  

“Go on, Mr. Smith.” 

“Mr.  Colbert,  it’s  Mark  Smith,  President  of  the  White  House  Press  Corps   
Association.” 

I was suspicious. Mark Smith? It sounded like a made up name. 

“Well, every year the Association holds a charity dinner and we would like you  
to be our after-dinner speaker. The President will be there.” 

The President will be there. His words rang in my ear. I was interested, but 

first I had question: How much does it pay? I don’t care what the event is or 

who is going to be there. No. Free. Rides. 

218  1 People who did not skip ahead to this chapter, but read the book from start to finish as intended. 

T H E   W H I T E   H O U S E   C O R R E S P O N D E N T S ’   D I N N E R  

After my price was met, I threw myself into the preparations. Every night after 

the show, I would eat heavy banquet food and then stand behind a podium and 

try to talk. It was grueling work and there were some nights that I thought I 

couldn’t make it. But by the day before the event, I could talk for 30 minutes on 

a stomachful of Chicken Kiev and cheesecake. Nothing could stop me now. All 

that was left was to write the speech. 

Now the Heroes know how fast I can write when I don’t edit myself. Caring 

about whether something “makes sense” or “promotes violence” only leads to 

writer’s block and ultimately suicide. I don’t play that game. My plan was to 

write the speech on the car ride over to the dinner. Unfortunately, the dinner 

turned out to be at the Washington Hilton—the same hotel where I was staying. 

That meant whatever remarks I was going to prepare would have to be written 

in the elevator ride from my suite to the banquet room. I’d have to wing every-

thing else straight from my gut. So be it. I love a challenge, plus elevators have 

emergency stop buttons. 

Finally, the night came. April 29, 2006. Was I nervous? Sure. But I put on my 

game  face.  I  also  put  on  my  game  clothes.  The  Tuxedo.  I  was  born  to  wear 

a tux. In fact, as a child my parents used to rent me out as a ring bearer for 

shotgun weddings. 

Barry Manilow. 

NEWS FLASH: I wore my White House Correspondents’ Dinner tuxedo to 

the 2006 Emmy Awards. After I lost, I had it cremated and scattered over 

First stop was a private VIP cocktail party with the President. How exclusive 

was it? Two words: Open Bar. Not even drink tickets. Karl Rove just stamped 

the back of your hand when you came in. 

I was mixing with the crème de la crème of Republican celebrities. Names like 

Tommy Lasorda and the wife from Everybody Loves Raymond. 

Then, George W. Bush arrived. He made a beeline for me, in that, like a bee, he 

went all around the room and then came up to me last. 

“Pleased to meet you, ColberT.” 

219 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

Then he extended the hand that signed off on “Shock and Awe.” It was as soft 

as a mitten made from angel food cake. His eyes were steely, and he had the 

faraway look of a man who was replaying a video game in his mind. 

With the President by my side, I was now ready to give the Washington Press 

Corps a pranging they would not soon forget. I was inspired, I was focused, and 

I had to pee like a racehorse at an iced tea convention. I approached a Secret 

Service agent and asked where the Little Pundits’ room was. He led me down 

a hallway to a door emblazoned with the Great Seal and the words “POTUS 

Only.” I was going to use the bathroom reserved for our Commander in Chief. 

My  heart  swelled  with  pride  as  I  lifted  the  seat  and  imagined  Eisenhower, 

Nixon, and Reagan doing the same—really made it hard to get a flow started. 

But I’m proud to say I left my mark in that true Hall of Presidents. My only 

regret was that I had a light lunch. 

Sitting on the dais overlooking Washington’s elite, I felt like the Best Man at 

a wedding between the Statue of Liberty and Mount Rushmore. Everywhere I 

looked there were members of Congress, Justices of the Supreme Court, and 

Distinguished Black Actors. My months of training came in handy when the 

meal turned out to be both surf and turf. I entered what climbers call the Death 

Zone.  With  a  bellyful  of  protein,  I  watched  President  Bush’s  presentation, 

which co-starred a President Bush impersonator. By this point, I was so high 

on endorphins that I had double vision, so to me, there were four President 

Bushes up there. Ecstasy! 

hot and hard: 

Then it was my turn. My heart raced as I strode to the podium and brought it 

220 

T H E   W H I T E   H O U S E   C O R R E S P O N D E N T S ’   D I N N E R  

Thank  you, 

ladies  and  gentlemen. 

Before I begin, I’ve been asked to make 

an  announcement.  Whoever  parked 

14  black  bulletproof  SUVs  out  front, 

could you please move them? They are 

blocking  in  14  other  black  bulletproof 

SUVs and they need to get out. 

Wow. Wow, what an honor. The White House Correspondents’ Dinner. To actu-

ally sit here, at the same table with my hero, George W. Bush, to be this close 

to  the  man.  I  feel  like  I’m  dreaming.  Somebody  pinch  me.  You  know  what? 

I’m a pretty sound sleeper—that may not be enough. Somebody shoot me in 

Sometimes now 
when I dream, I’m 
back up there! 

the face. Is he really not here tonight? Damnit. The one guy who could have 

helped. 

By the way, before I get started, if anybody needs anything else at their tables, 

just  speak  slowly  and  clearly  into  your  table  numbers.  Somebody  from  the 

NSA will be right over with a cocktail. Mark Smith, ladies and gentlemen of the 

press corps, Madame First Lady, Mr. President, my name is Stephen Colbert 

and tonight it’s my privilege to celebrate this President. We’re not so different, 

he and I. We get it. We’re not brainiacs on the nerd patrol. We’re not members 

of the Factinista. We go straight from the gut, right sir? That’s where the truth 

lies, right down here in the gut. Do you know you have more nerve endings 

in your gut than you have in your head? You can look it up. I know some of 

you are going to say “I did look it up, and that’s not true.” That’s because you 

looked it up in a book. 

Small intestine: 26 
feet long. Brain: 10 
inches, tops. Sorry, 
brain fans! 

Next time, look it up in your gut. I did. 

My gut tells me that’s how our nervous 

system works. Every night on my show, 

The  Colbert  Report,  I  speak  straight 

from  the  gut,  OK?  I  give  people  the 

truth,  unfiltered  by  rational  argument. 

I call it the “No Fact Zone.” Fox News, I 

hold a copyright on that term.2 

2 Reminder: Pay myself licensing fee for reprinting it here. 

221 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

51, if you count both 
Dakotas. 

I’m a simple man with a simple mind. I hold a simple set of beliefs that I live 

by. Number one, I believe in America. I believe it exists. My gut tells me I live 

there.  I  feel  that  it  extends  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  and  I  strongly 

believe  it  has  50  states.  And  I  cannot  wait  to  see  how  the  Washington  Post 

spins that one tomorrow. I believe in democracy. I believe democracy is our 

greatest export. At least until China figures out a way to stamp it out of plastic 

for three cents a unit. 

In fact, Ambassador Zhou Wenzhong, welcome. Your great country makes our 

Happy Meals possible. I said it’s a celebration. I believe the government that 

governs best is the government that governs least. And by these standards, we 

have set up a fabulous government in Iraq. 

I also saw an 
after-hours show 
in Vegas called 
The Trickle-Down. 
Truly uplifting. 

I believe in pulling yourself up by your own bootstraps. I believe it is possible— 

I  saw  this  guy  do  it  once  in  Cirque  du  Soleil.  It  was  magical.  And  though  I 

am a committed Christian, I believe that everyone has the right to their own 

religion, be you Hindu, Jewish or Muslim. I believe there are infinite paths to 

accepting Jesus Christ as your personal savior. 

Ladies and gentlemen, I believe it’s yogurt. But I refuse to believe it’s not butter. 

Most of all, I believe in this President. 

Now I know there are some polls out there saying this man has a 32% approval 

rating.  But  guys  like  us,  we  don’t  pay  attention  to  the  polls.3 We  know  that 

polls are just a collection of statistics that reflect what people are thinking in 

“reality.” And reality has a well-known liberal bias. 

So,  Mr.  President,  please,  pay  no  attention  to  the  people  who  say  the  glass 

If he was dairy, he’d 
be American cheese. 

26%, as of this 
printing. 

Note to editor: Be 
sure to remove my 
flubbed line. 

is  half  full.  32%  means  the  glass—it’s 

important  to  set  up  your  jokes  prop-

erly,  sir.  Sir,  pay  no  attention  to  the 

people who say the glass is half empty, 

because  32%  means  it’s  2/3  empty. 

There’s still some liquid in that glass is 

my  point,  but  I  wouldn’t  drink  it.  The 

last third is usually backwash. 

222  3 Percent of President Bush that cares about polls: 3%. (Margin of error: ±3%) 

T H E   W H I T E   H O U S E   C O R R E S P O N D E N T S ’   D I N N E R  

Okay,  look,  folks,  my  point  is  that  I  don’t  believe  this  is  a  low  point  in  this 

presidency. I believe it is just a lull before a comeback. I mean, it’s like the 

movie Rocky. All right. The President in this case is Rocky Balboa and Apollo 

Creed is—everything else in the world. It’s the tenth round. He’s bloodied. His 

corner man is Mick, who in this case I guess would be the Vice President, and 

Maybe he’s more like 
Stallone’s Demolition 
Man—someone from 
the past who blows 
things up.

Bush is yelling, “Cut me, Dick, cut me!,” and every time he falls everyone says, 

“Stay down! Stay down!” Does he stay down? No. Like Rocky, he gets back up, 

and in the end he—actually, he loses in the first movie. 

 Spoiler alert! 

OK. Doesn’t matter. The point is it is the heartwarming story of a man who was 

repeatedly punched in the face. So don’t pay attention to the approval ratings 

that say 68% of Americans disapprove of the job this man is doing. I ask you 

this,  does  that  not  also  logically  mean  that  68%  approve  of  the  job  he’s  not 

doing? Think about it. I haven’t. 

I stand by this man. I stand by this man because he stands for things. Not only 

for  things,  he  stands  on  things.  Things  like  aircraft  carriers  and  rubble  and 

recently flooded city squares. And that sends a strong message: that no matter 

what happens to America, she will always rebound—with the most powerfully 

staged photo ops in the world. 

Now there may be an energy crisis. This President has a very forward-thinking 

energy policy. Why do you think he’s down on the ranch cutting that brush all 

the time? He’s trying to create an alternative energy source. By 2008 we will 

have a mesquite-powered car! 

And I just like the guy. He’s a good Joe. Obviously loves his wife, calls her his 

better half. And polls show America agrees. She’s a true lady and a wonderful 

woman. But I just have one beef, ma’am. I’m sorry, but this reading initiative. 

I’m sorry—I’ve never been a fan of books. I don’t trust them. They’re all fact, 

no heart. I mean, they’re elitist, telling us what is or isn’t true, or what did or 

didn’t happen. Who’s Britannica to tell me the Panama Canal was built in 1914? 

If I want to say it was built in 1941, that’s my right as an American!4 I’m with the 

President—let history decide what did or did not happen. 

4 “The Panama Canal was built in 1941.” Now it’s in a book, so it must be a fact. Eat it, Britannica! 

223 

The snapshots heard 
’round the world. 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

The greatest thing about this man is he’s steady. You know where he stands. 

He believes the same thing Wednesday that he believed on Monday, no matter 

what happened Tuesday. Events can change; this man’s beliefs never will. 

Never switch belief-
horses midstream-of-
consciousness. 

As  excited  as  I  am  to  be  here  with 

the  President,  I  am  appalled  to  be 

surrounded by the liberal media that is 

destroying America, with the exception 

of Fox News. Fox News gives you both 

sides of every story: the President’s side 

Geraldo also gives his 
mustache’s side. 

and the Vice President’s side.5 

But the rest of you, what are you thinking, reporting on NSA wiretapping or 

secret prisons in Eastern Europe?6 Those things are secret for a very impor-

tant  reason:  they’re  super-depressing.  And  if  that’s  your  goal,  well,  misery 

accomplished. 

Over the last five years you people were so good—over tax cuts, WMD intel-

ligence, the effect of global warming. We Americans didn’t want to know, and 

you had the courtesy not to try to find out. Those were good times, as far as 

Why not Tale of One 
City? “It was the best 
of times. The end.” 

we knew. 

But,  listen,  let’s  review  the  rules.  Here’s  how  it  works:  the  President  makes 

decisions. He’s the Decider. The press secretary announces those decisions, 

and you people of the press type those decisions down. Make, announce, type. 

Just put ’em through a spellcheck and go home. Get to know your family again. 

Make love to your wife. Write that novel you got kicking around in your head. 

You know—the one about the intrepid Washington reporter with the courage 

1. Make. 
2. Announce. 
3. Type. 
4. Do it.

Or Fantasy. 

to stand up to the administration. You know—fiction! 

Because really, what incentive do these people have to answer your questions, 

after all? I mean, nothing satisfies you. Everybody asks for personnel changes. 

So  the  White  House  has  personnel  changes.  Then  you  write,  “Oh,  they’re 

just rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic.” First of all, that is a terrible 

metaphor. This administration is not sinking. This administration is soaring. If 

anything, they are rearranging the deck chairs on the Hindenburg! 

And we’ve got a 
window seat! 

224  5 President’s side: Fair. Vice President’s side: Balanced. (And vice versa!) 

6 To editors of Eastern European editions: Please redact the “secret prisons” part. 

T H E   W H I T E   H O U S E   C O R R E S P O N D E N T S ’   D I N N E R  

Now it’s not all bad guys out there. Some are heroes: Christopher Buckley, Jeff 

Sacks, Ken Burns, Bob Schieffer. They’ve all been on my show. By the way, Mr. 

President, thank you for agreeing to be on my show. I was just as shocked as 

everyone here is, I promise you. How’s Tuesday for you? I’ve got Frank Rich, 

Episodes #2032, 
#2027, #110, and 
#2028 

but we can bump him. And I mean bump him. I know a guy. Say the word. 

The word: Nucular. 

See  who  we’ve  got  here  tonight.  General  Moseley,  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff. 

General Peter Pace, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. They still support 

Rumsfeld.  Right,  you  guys  aren’t  retired  yet,  right?  Right,  they  still  support 

Rumsfeld. 

Now Rumsfeld can 
finally say what 
he thought about 
himself! 

Look, by the way, I’ve got a theory about how to handle these retired generals 

causing all this trouble: don’t let them retire! Come on, we’ve got a stop-loss 

program;  let’s  use  it  on  these  guys.  I’ve  seen  Zinni  and  that  crowd  on  Wolf 

Blitzer. If you’re strong enough to go on one of those pundit shows, you can 

stand on a bank of computers and order men into battle. Come on. 

Jesse  Jackson  is  here,  the  Reverend.  Haven’t  heard  from  the  Reverend  in  a 

little while. I had him on the show. Very interesting and challenging interview. 

You can ask him anything, but he’s going to say what he wants, at the pace that 

he wants. It’s like boxing a glacier. Enjoy that metaphor, by the way, because 

your grandchildren will have no idea what a glacier is. 

Justice Scalia is here. Welcome, sir. May I be the first to say, you look fantastic. 

How are you? 

Arctic Circle lost by 
T.K.O. 

Just  talking  some  Sicilian  with  my 

paisan. 

“Paisan” is Italian for 
“Partisan,” right? 

John McCain is here. John McCain, John 

McCain,  what  a  maverick!  Somebody 

find out what fork he used on his salad, 

because  I  guarantee  you  it  wasn’t  a 

salad fork. This guy could have used a 

spoon!  There’s  no  predicting  him.  By 

the way, Senator McCain, it’s so wonderful to see you coming back into the 

Republican fold. I have a summer house in South Carolina; look me up when 

225 

The “Straight-Talk 
Express” may, in fact, 
make local stops!! 

Nagin will show 
you his righteous in-
dignation for beads. 

I   A M   A M E R I C A   ( A N D   S O   C A N   Y O U ! )  

you go to speak at Bob Jones University. So glad you’ve seen the light, sir. 

Mayor  Nagin!  Mayor  Nagin  is  here  from  New  Orleans,  the  chocolate  city! 

Yeah,  give  it  up.  Mayor  Nagin,  I’d  like  to  welcome  you  to  Washington,  D.C., 

the chocolate city with a marshmallow center. And a graham cracker crust of 

corruption. It’s a Mallomar,7 I guess is what I’m describing, a seasonal cookie. 

Joe  Wilson  is  here,  Joe  Wilson  right  down  here  in  front,  the  most  famous 

husband  since  Desi  Arnaz.  And  of  course  he  brought  along  his  lovely  wife 

Valerie Plame. Oh, my god. Oh, what have I said? I am sorry, Mr. President, 

I  meant  to  say  he  brought  along  his  lovely  wife,  Joe  Wilson’s  wife.  Patrick 

Fitzgerald is not here tonight? OK. Dodged a bullet. 

And, of course, we can’t forget the man of the hour, new press secretary, Tony 

Snow. Secret Service name, “Snow Job.” Toughest job. What a hero. Took the 

second  toughest  job  in  government,  next  to,  of  course,  the  ambassador  to 

Iraq. 

Got some big shoes to fill, Tony. Big shoes to fill. Scott McClellan could say 

nothing like nobody else. McClellan, of course, eager to retire. Really felt like 

he needed to spend more time with Andrew Card’s children. Mr. President, I 

wish you hadn’t made the decision so quickly, sir. 

I  was  vying  for  the  job  myself.  I  think  I  would  have  made  a  fabulous  press 

secretary. I have nothing but contempt for these people. I know how to handle 

these clowns. 

In fact, sir, I brought along an audition tape, and with your indulgence, I’d like 

to at least give it a shot. So, ladies and gentlemen, my press conference. 

[What followed was a riveting documentary on the dangers of Helen Thomas. 

Imagine that you are watching it.] 

Helen Thomas, ladies and gentlemen. Mr. Smith, members of the White House 

Correspondents’  Association,  Madame  First  Lady,  Mr.  President,  it’s  been  a 

true honor. Thank you very much. Good night! 

226  7 As desserts go, it’s way better than the “Heckuva-Job” Brownie. 

T H E   W H I T E   H O U S E   C O R R E S P O N D E N T S ’   D I N N E R  

I’m happy to say my speech was met with respectful silence.8 You could hear a 

pin drop. Or a sphincter clamp. 

The  President  was  the  first  one  to  greet  me.  “Well  done,”  he  said.  That  was 

payment enough. That, and the check in my breast pocket. 


