

INTRODUCTION: EXPOSITION OF THE QUESTION OF THE

MEANING OF BEING

 

I: THE NECESSITY, STRUCTURE, AND PRIORITY OF THE

QUESTION OF BEING

1. The Necessity for Explicitly Restating the Question of Being

 

 

 

H. 2

the  utmost 

intellectual  effort  from 

THIS  question  has  today  been  forgotten.  Even  though  in  our  time  we
deem it progressive to give our approval to ‘metaphysics’ again, it is held
that  we  have  been  exempted  from  the  exertions  of  a  newly  rekindled
γιγαντομαχία περὶ τῆς οὐσίας. Yet the question we are touching upon is not
just  a n y question. It is one which provided a stimulus for the researches of
Plato  and  Aristotle,  only  to  subside  from  then  on  as  a  theme  for  actual
investigation.(1) What these two men achieved was to persist through many
alterations and ‘retouchings’ down to the ‘logic’ of Hegel. And what they
the  phenomena,
wrested  with 
fragmentary and incipient though it was, has long since become trivialized.
Not only  that. On the  basis of the  Greeks’ initial contributions  towards
an  Interpretation  of  Being,  a  dogma  has  been  developed  which  not  only
declares  the  question  about  the  meaning  of  Being  to  be  superfluous,  but
sanctions its complete neglect. It is said that ‘Being’ is the most universal
and the emptiest of concepts. As such it resists every attempt at definition.
Nor  does  this  most  universal  and  hence  indefinable  concept  require  any
definition, for everyone uses it constantly and already understands what he
means  by  it.  In  this  way,  that  which  the  ancient  philosophers  found
continually  disturbing  as  something  obscure  and  hidden  has  taken  on  a
clarity and self-evidence such that if anyone continues to ask about it he is
charged with an error of method.
 

1. ‘…als thematische Frage wirklicher Untersuchung’. When Heidegger speaks of a question as
‘thematisch’,  he  thinks  of  it  as  one  which  is  taken  seriously  and  studied  in  a  systematic  manner.
While  we  shall  often  translate  this  adjective  by  its  cognate,  ‘thematic’,  we  may  sometimes  find  it

convenient to choose more flexible expressions involving the word ‘theme’. (Heidegger gives a fuller
discussion on H. 363.)

H. 3

 

At the beginning of our investigation it is not possible to give a detailed
account  of  the  presuppositions  and  prejudices  which  are  constantly
reimplanting  and  fostering  the  belief  that  an  inquiry  into  Being  is
unnecessary.  They  are  rooted  in  ancient  ontology  itself;  and  it  will  not  be
possible  to  interpret  that  ontology  adequately  until  the  question  of  Being
has been clarified and answered and taken as a clue—at least, if we are to
have  regard  for  the  soil  from  which  the  basic  ontological  concepts
developed,  and  if  we  are  to  see  whether  the  categories  have  been
demonstrated in a way that is appropriate and complete. We shall therefore
carry the discussion of these presuppositions only to the point at which the
necessity  for  restating  the  question  about  the  meaning  of  Being  becomes
plain. There are three such presuppositions.

1.  First,  it  has  been  maintained  that  ‘Being’  is  the  ‘most  universal’
concept: τὸ ὂν έστι καθόλου μάλιστα πάντων.(i) Illud quod primo cadit sub
apprehensione est ens, cuius intellectus includitur in omnibus, quaecumque
quis  apprehendit.  ‘An  understanding  of  Being  is  already  included  in
conceiving  anything  which  one  apprehends  in  entities.’(1)(ii)  But  the
‘universality’  of  ‘Being’  is  not  that  of  a  class  or genus.  The  term  ‘Being’
does  not  define  that  realm  of  entities  which  is  uppermost  when  these  are
Articulated conceptually according to genus and species: οὔτε τὸ ὂν γένος.
(iii) The ‘universality’ of Being ‘transcends’  any universality of genus. In
medieval  ontology  ‘Being’  is  designated  as  a  ‘transcendens’.  Aristotle
himself  knew  the  unity  of  this  transcendental  ‘universal’  as  a  unity  of
analogy  in  contrast  to  the  multiplicity  of  the  highest  generic  concepts
applicable to things. With this discovery, in spite of his dependence on the
way in which the ontological question had been formulated by Plato, he put
the  problem  of  Being  on  what  was,  in  principle,  a  new  basis.  To  be  sure,
even  Aristotle  failed  to  clear  away  the  darkness  of  these  categorial
interconnections. In medieval ontology this problem was widely discussed,
especially in the Thomist and Scotist schools, without reaching clarity as to
principles.  And  when  Hegel  at  last  defines  ‘Being’  as  the  ‘indeterminate
immediate’  and  makes  this  definition  basic  for  all  the  further  categorial
explications of his ‘logic’, he keeps looking in the same direction as ancient

ontology, except that he no longer pays heed to Aristotle’s problem of the
unity of Being as over against the multiplicity of ‘categories’ applicable to
things. So if it is said that ‘Being’ is the most universal concept, this cannot
mean  that  it  is  the  one  which  is  clearest  or  that  it  needs  no  further
discussion. It is rather the darkest of all.
 

i. Aristotle, Metaphysica B 4, 1001 a 21.
ii. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica ii Q. 94 art. 2.
iii. Aristotle, Metaphysica B 3, 998 b 22.

1.  ‘  “…was  einer  am  Seienden  erfasst”  ’.  The  word  ‘Seiendes’,  which  Heidegger  uses  in  his
paraphrase, is one of the most important words in the book. The substantive ‘das Seiende’ is derived
from  the  participle  ‘seiend’  (see  note  1,  H.  1),  and  means  literally  ‘that  which  is’;  ‘ein  Seiendes’
means ‘something which is’. There is much to be said for translating ‘Seiendes’ by the noun ‘being’
or ‘beings’ (for it is often used in a collective sense). We feel, however, that it is smoother and less
confusing  to  write  ‘entity’  or  ‘entities’.  We  are  well  aware  that  in  recent  British  and  American
philosophy the term ‘entity’ has been used more generally to apply to almost anything whatsoever,
no  matter  what  its  ontological  status.  In  this  translation,  however,  it  will  mean  simply  ‘something
which  is’.  An  alternative  translation  of  the  Latin  quotation  is  given  by  the  English  Dominican
Fathers, Summa Theologica, Thomas Baker, London, I 915: ‘For that which, before aught else, falls
under  apprehension,  is  being,  the  notion  of  which  is  included  in  all  things  whatsoever  a  man
apprehends.’

 

 

H. 4

2.  It  has  been  maintained  secondly  that  the  concept  of  ‘Being’  is
indefinable.  This  is  deduced  from  its  supreme  universality,(iv)  and  rightly
so,  if  definitio  fit  per  genus  proximum  et  differentiam  specificam.  ‘Being’
cannot indeed be conceived as an entity; enti non additur aliqua natura: nor
can  it  acquire  such  a  character  as  to  have  the  term  “entity”  applied  to  it.
“Being” cannot be derived from higher concepts by definition, nor can it be
presented  through  lower  ones.  But  does  this  imply  that  ‘Being’  no  longer
offers a problem? Not at all. We can infer only that ‘Being’ cannot have the
character  of  an  entity.  Thus  we  cannot  apply  to  Being  the  concept  of
‘definition’ as presented in traditional logic, which itself has its foundations
in ancient ontology and which, within certain limits, provides a justifiable
way  of  characterizing  “entities”.  The  indefinability  of  Being  does  not
eliminate the question of its meaning; it demands that we look that question
in the face.

3. Thirdly, it is  held  that ‘Being’  is  of all concepts the  one that is  self-
evident. Whenever one cognizes anything or makes an assertion, whenever

one comports oneself towards entities, even towards oneself,(1) some use is
made  of  ‘Being’;  and  this  expression  is  held  to  be  intelligible  ‘without
further ado’, just as everyone understands ‘The sky is blue’,  ‘I am  merry’,
and  the  like.  But  here  we  have  an  average  kind  of  intelligibility,  which
merely demonstrates that this is unintelligible. It makes manifest that in any
way of comporting oneself towards entities as entities—even in any Being
towards entities as entities—there lies a priori an enigma.(2) The very fact
that we already live in an understanding of Being and that the meaning of
Being  is  still  veiled  in  darkness  proves  that  it  is  necessary  in  principle  to
raise this question again.

Within  the  range  of  basic  philosophical  concepts—especially  when  we
come  to  the  concept  of  ‘Being’—it  is  a  dubious  procedure  to  invoke  self-
evidence,  if  indeed  the  ‘self-evident’  (Kant’s  ‘covert  judgments  of  the
common  reason’)(3)  is  to  become  the  sole  explicit  and  abiding  theme  for
one’s analytic—‘the business of philosophers’.

By considering these prejudices, however, we have made plain not only
that  the  question  of  Being  lacks  an  answer,  but  that  the  question  itself  is
obscure and without direction. So if it is to be revived, this means that we
must first work out an adequate way of formulating it.
 

iv.  Cf.  Pascal,  Pensées  et  Opuscules  (ed.  Brunschvicg),  Paris,  1912,  p.  169;  ‘On  ne  peut
entreprendre  de  définir  l’être  sans  tomber  dans  cette  absurdité:  car  on  ne  peut  définir  un  mot  sans
commencer  par  celui-ci,  c’est,  soit  qu’on  l’exprime  ou  qu’on  le  sous-entende.  Donc  pour  définir
l’être, il faudrait dire c’est, et ainsi employer le mot défini dans sa définition.’
 

1.  ‘..in  jedem  Verhalten  zu  Seiendem,  in  jedem  Sich-zu-sich-selbst-verhalten…’  The  verb
‘verhalten’ can refer to any kind of behaviour or way of conducting oneself, even to the way in which
one  relates  oneself  to  something  else,  or  to  the  way  one  refrains  or  holds  oneself  back.  We  shall
translate it in various ways.

2. ‘Sie macht offenbar, dass in jedem Verhalten und Sein zu Seiendem als Seiendem a priori ein
Rätsel  liegt.’  The  phrase  ‘Sein  zu  Seiendem’  is  typical  of  many  similar  expressions  an  which  the
substantive ‘Sein’ is followed by the preposition ‘zu’. In such expressions we shall usually translate
‘zu’  as  ‘towards’:  for  example,  ‘Being-towards-death’,  ‘Being  towards  Others’,  ‘Being  towards
entities within-the-world’.

3. ‘ “die geheimen Urteile der gemeinen Vernunft” ’.

2. The Formal Structure of the Question of Being

 

 

H. 5

The  question  of  the  meaning  of  Being  must  be  formulated.  If  it  is  a
fundamental question, or indeed the fundamental question, it must be made
transparent, and in an appropriate way.(1) We must therefore explain briefly
what  belongs  to  any  question  whatsoever,  so  that  from  this  standpoint  the
question  of  Being  can  be  made  visible  as  a  very  special  one  with  its  own
distinctive character.

Every  inquiry  is  a  seeking  [Suchen].  Every  seeking  gets  guided
beforehand by what is sought. Inquiry is a cognizant seeking for an entity
both with regard to the fact  t h a t  i t  i s  and with regard to its Being  a s  i
t    i  s.(2)  This  cognizant  seeking  can  take  the  form  of  ‘investigating’
[“Untersuchen”],  in  which  one  lays  bare  that  which  the  question  is  about
and ascertains its character. Any inquiry, as an inquiry about something, has
that which is asked about [sein Gefragtes]. But all inquiry about something
is somehow a questioning of something [Anfragen bei…]. So in addition to
what  is  asked  about,  an  inquiry  has  that  which  is  interrogated  [ein
Befragtes].  In  investigative  questions—that  is,  in  questions  which  are
specifically 
is  determined  and
conceptualized.  Furthermore,  in  what  is  asked  about  there  lies  also  that
which is to be found out by the asking [das Erfragte]; this is what is really
intended:(3)  with  this  the  inquiry  reaches  its  goal.  Inquiry  itself  is  the
behaviour  of  a  questioner,  and  therefore  of  an  entity,  and  as  such  has  its
own  character  of  Being.  When  one  makes  an  inquiry  one  may  do  so  ‘just
casually’  or  one  may  formulate  the  question  explicitly.  The  latter  case  is
peculiar  in  that  the  inquiry  does  not  become  transparent  to  itself  until  all
these  constitutive  factors  of  the  question  have  themselves  become
transparent.
 

theoretical—what 

is  asked  about 

1.  ‘…dann  bedarf  solches  Fragen  der  angemessenen  Durchsichtigkeit’.  The  adjective
‘durchsichtig’  is  one  of  Heidegger’s  favourite  expressions,  and  means  simply  ‘transparent’,
‘perspicuous’, something that one can ‘see through’. We shall ordinarily translate it by ‘transparent’.
See H. 146 for further discussion.

2. ‘…in seinem Dass- und Sosein’.
3. ‘…das eigentlich Intendierte…’ The adverb ‘eigentlich’ occurs very often in this work. It may
be used informally where one might write ‘really’ or ‘on its part’, or in a much stronger sense, where
something like ‘genuinely’ or ‘authentically’ would be more appropriate. It is not always possible to
tell which meaning Heidegger has in mind. In the contexts which seem relatively informal we shall
write ‘really’; in the more technical passages we shall write ‘authentically’, reserving ‘genuinely’ for
‘genuin’  or  ‘echt’.  The  reader  must  not  confuse  this  kind  of  ‘authenticity’  with  the  kind,  which
belongs  to  an  ‘authentic  text’  or  an  ‘authentic  account’.  See  H.  42  for  further  discussion.  In  the
present  passage, the verb ‘intendieren’  is presumably used in the medieval sense of ‘intending’,  as
adapted and modified by Brentano and Husserl.

The question about the meaning of Being is to be formulated. We  must

therefore discuss it with an eye to these structural items.

Inquiry,  as  a  kind  of  seeking,  must  be  guided  beforehand  by  what  is
sought.  So  the  meaning  of  Being  must  already  be  available  to  us  in  some
way.  As  we  have  intimated,  we  always  conduct  our  activities  in  an
understanding  of  Being.  Out  of  this  understanding  arise  both  the  explicit
question of the meaning of Being and the tendency that leads us towards its
conception.  We  do  not  know  what  ‘Being’  means.  But  even  if  we  ask,
‘What is “Being”?’, we keep within an understanding of the ‘is’, though we
are unable to fix conceptually what that ‘is’ signifies. We do not even know
the horizon in terms of which that meaning is to be grasped and fixed. But
this vague average understanding of Being is still a Fact.

H. 6

 

However much this understanding of Being (an understanding which is
already  available  to  us)  may  fluctuate  and  grow  dim,  and  border  on  mere
acquaintance  with  a  word,  its  very  indefiniteness  is  itself  a  positive
phenomenon which needs to be clarified. An investigation of the meaning
of Being cannot be expected to give this clarification at the outset. If we are
to  obtain  the  clue  we  need  for  Interpreting  this  average  understanding  of
Being,  we  must  first  develop  the  concept  of  Being.  In  the  light  of  this
concept  and  the  ways  in  which  it  may  be  explicitly  understood,  we  can
make  out  what  this  obscured  or  still  unillumined  understanding  of  Being
means,  and  what  kinds  of  obscuration—or  hindrance  to  an  explicit
illumination—of the meaning of Being are possible and even inevitable.

Further, this vague average understanding of Being may be so infiltrated
with traditional theories and opinions about Being that these remain hidden
as sources of the way in which it is prevalently understood. What we seek
when we inquire into Being is not something entirely unfamiliar, even if at
first(1) we cannot grasp it at all.

In the question which we are to work out, what is asked about is  Being
—that  which  determines  entities  as  entities,  that  on  the  basis  of  which
[woraufhin] entities are already understood, however we may discuss them
in  detail.  The  Being  of  entities  ‘is’  not  itself  an  entity.  If  we  are  to
understand  the  problem  of  Being,  our  first  philosophical  step  consists  in
μῦθόν  τινα  διηγεῖσθαι,(v)  in  not  ‘telling  a  story’—that  is  to  say,  in  not

defining  entities  as  entities  by  tracing  them  back  in  their  origin  to  some
other entities, as if Being had the character of some possible entity. Hence
Being, as that which is asked about, must be exhibited in a way of its own,
essentially  different  from  the  way  in  which  entities  are  discovered.
Accordingly, what is to be found out by the asking—the meaning of Being
—also  demands  that  it  be  conceived  in  a  way  of  its  own,  essentially
contrasting  with  the  concepts  in  which  entities  acquire  their  determinate
signification.
 

v. Plato, Sophistes 242c.

1. ‘zunächst’. This word is of very frequent occurrence in Heidegger, and he will discuss his use
of it on H. 370 below. In ordinary German usage the word may mean ‘at first’, ‘to begin with’, or ‘in
the first instance’, and we shall often translate it in such ways. The word is, however, cognate with
the  adjective  ‘nah’  and  its  superlative  ‘nächst’,  which  we  shall  usually  translate  as  ‘close’  and
‘closest’ respectively; and Heidegger often uses ‘zunächst’ in the sense of ‘most closely’, when he is
describing  the  most  ‘natural’  and  ‘obvious’  experiences  which  we  have  at  an  uncritical  and  pre-
philosophical  level.  We  have  ventured  to  translate  this  Heideggerian  sense  of  ‘zunächst’  as
‘proximally’,  but  there  are  many  border-line  cases  where  it  is  not  clear  whether  Heidegger  has  in
mind  this  special  sense  or  one  of  the  more  general  usages,  and  in  such  cases  we  have  chosen
whatever expression seems stylistically preferable.

 

 

H. 7

In  so  far  as  Being  constitutes  what  is  asked  about,  and  “Being”  means
the  Being  of  entities,  then  entities  themselves  turn  out  to  be  what  is
interrogated. These are, so to speak, questioned as regards their Being. But
if the characteristics of their Being can be yielded without falsification, then
these  entities  must,  on  their  part,  have  become  accessible  as  they  are  in
themselves.  When  we  come  to  what  is  to  be  interrogated,  the  question  of
Being  requires  that  the  right  way  of  access  to  entities  shall  have  been
obtained  and  secured  in  advance.  But  there  are  many  things  which  we
designate as ‘being’ [“seiend”], and we do so in various senses. Everything
we  talk  about,  everything  we  have  in  view,  everything  towards  which  we
comport ourselves in any way, is being; what we are is being, and so is how
we are. Being lies in the fact that something is, and in its Being as it is; in
Reality;  in  presence-at-hand;  in  subsistence;  in  validity;  in  Dasein;  in  the
‘there  is’.(1)  In  which  entities  is  the  meaning  of  Being  to  be  discerned?
From which entities is the disclosure of Being to take its departure? Is the
starting-point optional, or does some particular entity have priority when we

come to work out the question of Being? Which entity shall we take for our
example, and in what sense does it have priority?

If  the  question  about  Being  is  to  be  explicitly  formulated  and  carried
through in such a manner as to be completely transparent to itself, then any
treatment  of  it  in  line  with  the  elucidations  we  have  given  requires  us  to
explain how Being is to be looked at, how its meaning is to be understood
and conceptually grasped; it requires us to prepare the way for choosing the
right entity for our example, and to work out the genuine way of access to
it. Looking at something, understanding and conceiving it, choosing, access
to  it—all  these  ways  of  behaving  are  constitutive  for  our  inquiry,  and
therefore  are  modes  of  Being  for  those  particular  entities  which  we,  the
inquirers, are ourselves. Thus to work out the question of Being adequately,
we must make an entity—the inquirer—transparent in his own Being. The
very asking of this question is an entity’s mode of Being; and as such it gets
its essential character from what is inquired about—namely, Being.
 

1. ‘Sein liegt im Dass- und Sosein, in Realität, Vorhandenheit, Bestand, Geltung, Dasein, im “es

gibt”.’ On ‘Vorhandenheit’ (‘presence-at-hand’) see note 1, H. 25. On ‘Dasein’, see note 1, H. 8.

This entity which each of us is himself and which includes inquiring as
one of the possibilities of its Being, we shall denote by the term “Dasein”.
(1) If we are to formulate our question explicitly and transparently, we must
first give a proper explication of an entity (Dasein), with regard to its Being.
Is  there  not,  however,  a  manifest  circularity  in  such  an  undertaking?  If
we must first define an entity in its Being, and if we want to formulate the
question of Being only on this basis, what is this but going in a circle? In
working out our question, have we not ‘presupposed’ something which only
the  answer  can  bring?  Formal  objections  such  as  the  argument  about
‘circular  reasoning’,  which  can  easily  be  cited  at  any  time  in  the  study  of
first principles, are always sterile when one is considering concrete ways of
investigating.  When  it  comes  to  understanding  the  matter  at  hand,  they
carry no weight and keep us from penetrating into the field of study.

H. 8

 

But  factically(2)  there  is  no  circle  at  all  in  formulating  our  question  as
we have described. One can determine the nature of entities in their Being

without necessarily having the explicit concept of the meaning of Being at
one’s disposal. Otherwise there could have been no ontological knowledge
heretofore.  One  would  hardly  deny  that  factically  there  has  been  such
knowledge.(3) Of course ‘Being’ has been presupposed in all ontology up
till now, but not as a concept at one’s disposal—not as the sort of thing we
are seeking. This ‘presupposing’ of Being has rather the character of taking
a look at it beforehand, so that in the light of it the entities presented to us
get provisionally Articulated in their Being.
 

1.  The  word  ‘Dasein’  plays  so  important  a  role  in  this  work  and  is  already  so  familiar  to  the
English-speaking reader who has read about Heidegger, that it seems simpler to leave it untranslated
except in the relatively rare passages in which Heidegger himself breaks it up with a hypthen (‘Da-
sein’)  to  show  its  etymological  construction:  literally  ‘Being-there’.  Though  in  traditional  German
philosophy it may be used quite generally to stand for almost any kind of Being or ‘existence’ which
we can say that something has (the ‘existence’ of God, for example), in everyday usage it tends to be
used  more  narrowly  to  stand  for  the  kind  of  Being  that  belongs  to  persons. Heidegger  follows  the
everyday  usage  in  this  respect,  but  goes  somewhat  further  in  that  he  often  uses  it  to  stand  for  any
person who has such Being, and who is thus an ‘entity’ himself. See H. 11 below.

2. ‘faktisch’. While this word can often be translated simply as ‘in fact’ or ‘as a matter of fact’, it
is  used  both  as  an  adjective  and  as  an  adverb  and  is  so  characteristic  of  Heidegger’s  style  that  we
shall as a rule translate it either as ‘factical’ or as ‘factically’, thus preserving its connection with the
important  noun  ‘Faktizität’  (‘facticity’),  and  keeping  it  distinct  from  ‘tatsächlich’  (‘factual’)  and
‘wirklich’  (‘actual’).  See  the  discussion  of  ‘Tatsächlichkeit’  and  ‘Faktizität’  in  Sections  12  and  29
below (H. 56, 135).

3. ‘…deren faktischen Bestand man wohl nicht leugnen wird’.

to 

This guiding activity of taking a look at Being arises from the average
understanding  of  Being  in  which  we  always  operate  and  which  in  the  end
belongs 
itself.  Such
the  essential  constitution(1)  of  Dasein 
‘presupposing’ has nothing to do with laying down an axiom from which a
sequence  of  propositions  is  deductively  derived.  It  is  quite  impossible  for
there  to  be  any  ‘circular  argument’  in  formulating  the  question  about  the
meaning  of  Being;  for  in  answering  this  question,  the  issue  is  not  one  of
grounding something by such a derivation; it is rather one of laying bare the
grounds for it and exhibiting them.(2)

In the question of the meaning of Being there is no ‘circular reasoning’
but rather a remarkable ‘relatedness backward or forward’ which what we
are asking about (Being) bears to the inquiry itself as a mode of Being of an
entity.  Here  what  is  asked  about  has  an  essential  pertinence  to  the  inquiry
itself,  and  this  belongs  to  the  ownmost  meaning  [eigensten  Sinn]  of  the
question of Being. This only means, however, that there is a way—perhaps

even a very special one—in which entities with the character of Dasein are
related to the question of Being. But have we not thus demonstrated that a
certain kind of entity has a priority with regard to its Being? And have we
not thus presented that entity which shall serve as the primary example to
be  interrogated  in  the  question  of  Being?  So  far  our  discussion  has  not
demonstrated Dasein’s priority, nor has it shown decisively whether Dasein
may  possibly  or  even  necessarily  serve  as  the  primary  entity  to  be
interrogated. But indeed something like a priority of Dasein has announced
itself.
 

1. ‘Wesensverfassung’. ‘Verfassung’ is the standard word for the ‘constitution’ of a nation or any
political  organization,  but  it  is  also  used  for  the  ‘condition’  or  ‘state’  in  which  a  person  may  find
himself. Heidegger seldom uses the word in either of these senses; but he does use it in ways which
are  somewhat  analogous.  In  one  sense  Dasein’s  ‘Verfassung’  is  its  ‘constitution’,  the  way  it  is
constituted,  ‘sa  condition  humaine’.  In  another  sense  Dasein  may  have  several  ‘Verfassungen’  as
constitutive  ‘states’  or  factors  which  enter  into  its  ‘constitution’.  We  shall,  in  general,  translate
‘Verfassung’ as ‘constitution’ or ‘constitutive state’ according to the context; but in passages where
‘constitutive  state’  would  be  cumbersome  and  there  is  little  danger  of  ambiguity,  we  shall  simply
write ‘state’. These states, however, must always be thought of as constitutive and essential, not as
temporary  or  transitory  stages  like  the  ‘state’  of  one’s  health  or  the  ‘state  of  the  nation’.  When
Heidegger uses the word ‘Konstitution’, we shall usually indicate this by capitalizing ‘Constitution’.
2. ‘...weil es in der Beantwortung der Frage nicht um eine ableitende Begründung, sondern um
aufweisende Grund-Freilegung geht.’ Expressions of the form ‘es geht... um...’ appear very often in
this work. We shall usually translate them by variants on ‘...is an issue for...’.

3. The Ontological Priority of the Question of Being

When we pointed out the characteristics of the question of Being, taking
as  our  clue  the  formal  structure  of  the  question  as  such,  we  made  it  clear
that  this  question  is  a  peculiar  one,  in  that  a  series  of  fundamental
considerations is required for working it out, not to mention for solving it.
But  its  distinctive  features  will  come  fully  to  light  only  when  we  have
delimited it adequately with regard to its function, its aim, and its motives.

 

 

H. 9

Hitherto  our  arguments  for  showing  that  the  question  must  be  restated
have been motivated in part by its venerable origin but chiefly by the lack
of a definite answer and even by the absence of any satisfactory formulation

of the question itself. One may, however, ask what purpose this quest ion is
supposed to serve. Does it simply remain—or is it at all—a mere matter for
soaring speculation about the most general of generalities, or is it rather, of
all questions, both the most basic and the most concrete?

Being  is  always  the  Being  of  an  entity.  The  totality  of  entities  can,  in
accordance  with  its  various  domains,  become  a  field  for  laying  bare  and
delimiting certain definite areas of subject-matter. These areas, on their part
(for  instance,  history,  Nature,  space,  life,  Dasein,  language,  and  the  like),
can serve as objects which corresponding scientific investigations may take
as  their  respective  themes.  Scientific  research  accomplishes,  roughly  and
naïvely,  the  demarcation  and  initial  fixing  of  the  areas  of  subject-matter.
The basic structures of any such area have already been worked out after a
fashion  in  our  pre-scientific  ways  of  experiencing  and  interpreting  that
domain of Being in which the area of subject-matter is itself confined. The
‘basic concepts’ which thus arise remain our proximal clues for disclosing
this  area  concretely  for  the  first  time.  And  although  research  may  always
lean  towards  this  positive  approach,  its  real  progress  comes  not  so  much
from  collecting  results  and  storing  them  away  in  ‘manuals’  as  from
inquiring into the ways in which each particular area is basically constituted
[Grundverfassungen]—an inquiry to which we have been driven mostly by
reacting against just such an increase in information.

The  real  ‘movement’  of  the  sciences  takes  place  when  their  basic
concepts  undergo  a  more  or  less  radical  revision  which  is  transparent  to
itself. The level which a science has reached is determined by how far it is
capable of  a  crisis  in  its  basic  concepts.  In  such  immanent  crises  the  very
relationship  between  positively  investigative  inquiry  and  those  things
themselves that are under interrogation comes to a point where it begins to
totter.  Among  the  various  disciplines  everywhere  today  there  are  freshly
awakened tendencies to put research on new foundations.

H. 10

 

Mathematics,  which  is  seemingly  the  most  rigorous  and  most  firmly
constructed of the sciences, has reached a crisis in its ‘foundations’. In the
controversy between the formalists and the intuitionists, the issue is one of
obtaining  and  securing  the  primary  way  of  access  to  what  are  supposedly
the objects of this science. The relativity theory of physics arises  from  the

tendency to exhibit the interconnectedness of Nature as it is ‘in itself’. As a
theory  of  the  conditions  under  which  we  have  access  to  Nature  itself,  it
seeks to preserve the changelessness of the laws of motion by ascertaining
all relativities, and thus comes up against the question of the structure of its
own  given  area  of  study—the  problem  of  matter.  In  biology  there  is  an
awakening  tendency  to  inquire  beyond  the  definitions  which  mechanism
and vitalism have given for “life” and “organism”, and to define anew the
kind of Being which belongs to the living as such. In those humane sciences
which  are  historiological  in  character,(1)  the  urge  towards  historical
actuality itself has been strengthened in the course of time by tradition and
by  the  way  tradition  has  been  presented  and  handed  down:  the  history  of
literature is to become the history of problems. Theology is seeking a more
primordial  interpretation  of  man’s  Being  towards  God,  prescribed  by  the
meaning  of  faith  itself  and  remaining  within  it.  It  is  slowly  beginning  to
understand  once  more  Luther’s  insight  that  the  ‘foundation’  on  which  its
system  of  dogma  rests  has  not  arisen  from  an  inquiry  in  which  faith  is
primary, and that conceptually this ‘foundation’ not only is inadequate for
the problematic of theology, but conceals and distorts it.

Basic  concepts  determine  the  way  in  which  we  get  an  understanding
beforehand of the area of subject-matter underlying all the objects a science
takes  as  its  theme,  and  all  positive  investigation  is  guided  by  this
understanding. Only after the area itself has been explored beforehand in a
corresponding  manner  do  these  concepts  become  genuinely  demonstrated
and  ‘grounded’.  But  since  every  such  area  is  itself  obtained  from  the
domain  of  entities  themselves,  this  preliminary  research,  from  which  the
basic  concepts  are  drawn,  signifies  nothing  else  than  an  interpretation  of
those entities with regard to their basic state of Being. Such research must
run ahead of the positive sciences, and it can. Here  the  work  of  Plato  and
Aristotle is evidence enough. Laying the foundations for the sciences in this
way  is  different  in  principle  from  the  kind  of  ‘logic’  which  limps  along
after,  investigating  the  status  of  some  science  as  it  chances  to  find  it,  in
order to discover its ‘method’.
 

‘Historie’  and 

1.  ‘In  den  historischen  Geisteswissenschaften...’  Heidegger  makes  much  of  the  distinction
between 
‘historisch’  and
‘geschichtlich’. ‘Historie’ stands for what Heidegger calls a ‘science of history’. (See H. 375, 378.)
‘Geschichte’ usually stands for the kind of ‘history’ that actually happens. We shall as a rule translate
these respectively as ‘historiology’ and ‘history’, following similar conventions in handling the two
adjectives. See especially Sections 6 and 76 below.

the  corresponding  adjectives 

‘Geschichte’  and 

Laying the foundations, as we have described it, is rather a productive
logic—in the sense that it leaps ahead, as it were, into some area of Being,
discloses it for the first time in the constitution of its Being, and, after thus
arriving  at  the  structures  within  it,  makes  these  available  to  the  positive
sciences  as  transparent  assignments  for  their  inquiry.(1)  To  give  an
example, what is philosophically primary is neither a theory of the concept-
formation  of  historiology  nor  the  theory  of  historiological  knowledge,  nor
yet  the  theory  of  history  as  the  Object  of  historiology;  what  is  primary  is
rather  the  Interpretation  of  authentically  historical  entities  as  regards  their
historicality.(2)  Similarly  the  positive  outcome  of  Kant’s  Critique  of  Pure
Reason  lies  in  what  it  has  contributed  towards  the  working  out  of  what
belongs  to  any  Nature  whatsoever,  not  in  a  ‘theory’  of  knowledge.  His
transcendental logic is an a priori logic for the subject-matter of that area of
Being called “Nature”.

H. 11

 

But  such  an  inquiry  itself—ontology  taken  in  the  widest  sense  without
favouring  any  particular  ontological  directions  or  tendencies—requires  a
further clue. Ontological inqury is indeed more primordial, as over against
the  ontical(3)  inquiry  of  the  positive  sciences.  But  it  remains  itself  naïve
and opaque if in its researches into the Being of entities it fails to discuss
the meaning of Being in general. And the ontological task of a genealogy of
the  different  possible  ways  of  Being  (which  is  not  to  be  constructed
deductively) is precisely of such a sort as to require that we first come to an
understanding of ‘what we really mean by this expression “Being” ’.

The  question  of  Being  aims  therefore  at  ascertaining  the  a  priori
conditions  not  only  for  the  possibility  of  the  sciences  which  examine
entities as entities of such and such a type, and, in so doing, already operate
with  an  understanding  of  Being,  but  also  for  the  possibility  of  those
ontologies  themselves  which  are  prior  to  the  ontical  sciences  and  which
provide  their  foundations. Basically,  all  ontology,  no  matter  how  rich  and
firmly compacted a system of categories it has at its disposal, remains blind
and perverted from its ownmost aim, if it has not first adequately clarified
the  meaning  of  Being,  and  conceived  this  clarification  as  its  fundamental
task.

Ontological  research  itself,  when  properly  understood,  gives  to  the
question  of  Being  an  ontological  priority  which  goes  beyond  mere
resumption  of  a  venerable  tradition  and  advancement  with  a  problem  that
has  hitherto  been  opaque.  But  this  objectively  scientific  priority  is  not  the
only one.
 

1. ‘…als durchsichtige Anweisungen des Fragens...’
2.  ‘…sondern  die  Intepretation  des  eigentlich  geschichtlich  Seienden  auf  seine  Ges.
chichtlichkeit’. We shall translate the frequently occurring term ‘Geschichtlichkeit’ as ‘historicality’.
Heidegger  very  occasionally  uses  the  term  ‘Historizität’,  as  on  H.  20  below,  and  this  will  be
translated as ‘historicity’.

3.  While  the  terms  ‘ontisch’  (‘ontical’)  and  ‘ontologisch’  (‘ontological’)  are  not  explicitly
defined, their meanings will emerge rather clearly. Ontological inquiry is concerned primarily with
Being; ontical inquiry is concerned primarily with entities and the facts about them.

4. The Ontical Priority of the Question of Being

 

 

H. 12

Science in general may be defined as the totality established through an
interconnection of true propositions.(1) This definition is not complete, nor
does  it  reach  the  meaning  of  science.  As  ways  in  which  man  behaves,
sciences  have  the  manner  of  Being  which  this  entity—man  himself—
possesses. This entity we denote by the term “Dasein”. Scientific  research
is not the only manner of Being which this entity can have, nor is it the one
which  lies  closest.  Moreover,  Dasein  itself  has  a  special  distinctiveness  as
compared with other entities, and it is worth our while to bring this to view
in a provisional way. Here our discussion must anticipate later analyses, in
which our results will be authentically exhibited for the first time.

Dasein  is  an  entity  which  does  not  just  occur  among  other  entities.
Rather  it  is  ontically  distinguished  by  the  fact  that,  in  its  very  Being,  that
Being  is  an  issue  for  it.  But  in  that  case,  this  is  a  constitutive  state  of
Dasein’s Being, and this implies that Dasein, in its Being, has a relationship
towards that Being—a relationship which itself is one of Being.(2) And this
means further that there is some way in which Dasein understands itself in
its Being, and that to some degree it does so explicitly. It is peculiar to this
entity  that  with  and  through  its  Being,  this  Being  is  disclosed  to  it.

Understanding of Being is itself a definite characteristic of Dasein’s Being.
Dasein is ontically distinctive in that it is ontological.(3)

Here  “Being-ontological”  is  not  yet  tantamount  to  “developing  an
ontology”. So if we should reserve the term “ontology” for that theoretical
inquiry which is explicitly devoted to the meaning of entities, then what we
have  had  in  mind  in  speaking  of  Dasein’s  “Being-ontological”  is  to  be
designated  as  something  “pre-ontological”.  It  does  not  signify  simply
“being-ontical”,  however,  but  rather  “being  in  such  a  way  that  one  has  an
understanding of Being”.
 

1. ‘...das Ganze eines Begründungszusammenhanges wahrer Sätze...’ See H. 357 below.
2  .‘Zu  dieser  Seinsverfassung  des  Daseins  gehört  aber  dann,  dass  es  in  seinem  Sein  zu  diesem
Sein  ein  Seinsverhältnis  hat.’  This  passage  is  ambiguous  and  might  also  be  read  as:  ‘...and  this
implies that Dasein, in its Being towards this Being, has a relationship of Being.’

3. ‘...dass es ontologisch ist’. As ‘ontologisch’ may be either an adjective or an adverb, we might
also  write:  ‘...that  it  is  ontologically’.  A  similar  ambiguity  occurs  in  the  two  following  sentences,
where we read ‘Ontologisch-sein’ and ‘ontisch-seiend’ respectively.

That kind of Being towards which Dasein can comport itself in one way
or  another,  and  always  does  comport  itself  somehow,  we  call  “existence”
[Existenz].  And  because  we  cannot  define  Dasein’s  essence  by  citing  a
“what”  of  the  kind  that  pertains  to  a  subject-matter  [eines  sachhaltigen
Was], and because its essence lies rather in the fact that in each case it has
its Being to be, and has it as its own,(1) we have chosen to designate this
entity  as  “Dasein”,  a  term  which  is  purely  an  expression  of  its  Being  [als
reiner Seinsausdruck].

Dasein always understands itself in terms of its existence—in terms of a
possibility of itself: to be itself or not itself. Dasein has either chosen these
possibilities itself, or got itself into them, or grown up in them already. Only
the particular Dasein decides its existence, whether it does so by taking hold
or  by  neglecting.  The  question  of  existence  never  gets  straightened  out
except  through  existing  itself.  The  understanding  of  oneself  which  leads
along this way we call “existentiell”.(2) The question of existence is one of
Dasein’s  ontical  ‘affairs’.  This  does  not  require  that  the  ontological
structure  of  existence  should  be  theoretically  transparent.  The  question
about  that  structure  aims  at  the  analysis  [Auseinanderlegung]  of  what
constitutes  existence.  The  context  [Zusammenhang]  of  such  structures  we
call “existentiality”. Its analytic has the character of an understanding which
is not existentiell, but rather existential. The  task  of  an  existential  analytic

of Dasein has been delineated in advance, as regards both its possibility and
its necessity, in Dasein’s ontical constitution.

H. 13

 

So  far  as  existence  is  the  determining  character  of  Dasein,  the
ontological  analytic  of  this  entity  always  requires  that  existentiality  be
considered beforehand. By “existentiality” we understand the state of Being
that  is  constitutive  for  those  entities  that  exist.  But  in  the  idea  of  such  a
constitutive state of Being, the idea of Being is already included. And thus
even the possibility of carrying through the analytic of Dasein depends on
working out beforehand the question about the meaning of Being in general.
Sciences  are  ways  of  Being  in  which  Dasein  comports  itself  towards
entities  which  it  need  not  be  itself.  But  to  Dasein,  Being  in  a  world  is
something  that  belongs  essentially.  Thus  Dasein’s  understanding  of  Being
pertains with equal primordiality both to an understanding of something like
a  ‘world’,  and  to  the  understanding  of  the  Being  of  those  entities  which
become accessible within the world.(3) So whenever an ontology takes for
its theme entities whose character of Being is other than that of Dasein, it
has its own foundation and motivation in Dasein’s own ontical structure, in
which  a  pre-ontological  understanding  of  Being  is  comprised  as  a  definite
characteristic.
 

1. ‘…dass es je sein Sein als seiniges zu sein hat…’
2. We shall translate ‘existenziell’ by ‘existentiell’, and ‘existenzial’ by ‘existential’. There seems

to be little reason for resorting to the more elaborate neologisms proposed by other writers.

3. ‘…innerhalb der Welt...’ Heidegger uses at least three expressions which might be translated
as ‘in the world’: ‘innerhalb der Welt’, ‘in der Welt’, and the adjective (or adverb) ‘innerweltlich’.
We shall translate these respectively by ‘within the world’, ‘in the world’, and ‘within-the-world’.

Therefore fundamental  ontology, from  which  alone  all  other  ontologies

can take their rise, must be sought in the existential analytic of Dasein.

Dasein accordingly takes priority over all other entities in several ways.
The first priority is an ontical one: Dasein is an entity whose Being has the
determinate  character  of  existence.  The  second  priority  is  an  ontological
one:  Dasein 
thus
determinative for it. But with equal primordiality Dasein also possesses—as
constitutive  for  its  understanding  of  existence—an  understanding  of  the

itself  ‘ontological’,  because  existence 

in 

is 

is 

Being of all entities of a character other than its own. Dasein has therefore a
third  priority  as  providing  the  ontico-ontological  condition  for  the
possibility of any ontologies. Thus Dasein has turned out to be, more than
any other entity, the one which must first be interrogated ontologically.

H. 14

 

But  the  roots  of  the  existential  analytic,  on  its  part,  are  ultimately
existentiell, that is, ontical. Only if the inquiry of philosophical research is
itself seized upon in an existentiell manner as a possibility of the Being of
each  existing  Dasein,  does  it  become  at  all  possible  to  disclose  the
existentiality  of  existence  and  to  undertake  an  adequately  founded
ontological problematic. But with this, the ontical priority of the question of
being has also become plain.

Dasein’s ontico-ontological priority was seen quite early, though Dasein
itself was not grasped in its genuine ontological structure, and did not even
become a problem in which this structure was sought. Aristotle says: ἡ ψυχὴ
τὰ ὄντα πώς ἐστιν.(vi) “Man’s soul is, in a certain way, entities.” The ‘soul’
which makes up the Being of man αἴσθησις and νόησις among  its  ways  of
Being, and in these it discovers all entities, both in the fact  t h a t  they are,
and in their Being  a s  they are—that is, always in their Being. Aristotle’s
principle, which points back to the ontological thesis of Parmenides, is one
which Thomas Aquinas has taken up in a characteristic discussion. Thomas
is engaged in the task of deriving the ‘transcendentia’—those characters of
Being  which  lie  beyond  every  possible  way  in  which  an  entity  may  be
classified  as  coming  under  some  generic  kind  of  subject-matter  (every
modus specialis entis), and which belong necessarily to anything, whatever
it  may  be.  Thomas  has  to  demonstrate  that  the  verum  is  such  a
transcendens. He does this by invoking an entity which, in accordance with
its very manner of Being, is properly suited to ‘come together with’ entities
of  any  sort  whatever.  This  distinctive  entity,  the  ens  quod  natum  est
convenire  cum  omni  ente,  is  the  soul  (anima).(vii)  Here  the  priority  of
‘Dasein’  over  all  other  entities  emerges,  although  it  has  not  been
ontologically clarified. This priority has obviously nothing in common with
a vicious subjectivizing of the totality of entities.

By  indicating  Dasein’s  ontico-ontological  priority  in  this  provisional
manner, we have grounded our demonstration that the question of Being is

ontico-ontologically distinctive. But when we analysed the structure of this
question as such (Section 2), we came up against a distinctive way in which
this  entity  functions  in  the  very  formulation  of  that  question.  Dasein  then
revealed  itself  as  that  entity  which  must  first  be  worked  out  in  an
ontologically  adequate  manner,  if  the  inquiry  is  to  become  a  transparent
one. But now it has been shown that the ontological analytic of Dasein in
general is what makes up fundamental ontology, so that Dasein functions as
that  entity  which  in  principle  is  to  be  interrogated  beforehand  as  to  its
Being.
 

vi. Aristotle, De Anima Г 8, 431 b 21; cf ibid. Г5, 430 a 14ff.
vii. Thomas Aquinas, Quaestiones de Veritate, q. I, a l c; cf. the somewhat different and in part
more rigorous way in which he carries out a ‘deduction’ of the transcendentia in  his  opuscule  ‘De
Natura Generis’.

H. 15

 

If to Interpret the meaning of Being becomes our task, Dasein is not only
the  primary  entity  to  be  interrogated;  it  is  also  that  entity  which  already
comports itself in its Being, towards what we are asking about when we ask
this  question.  But  in  that  case  the  question  of  Being  is  nothing  other  than
the  radicalization  of  an  essential  tendency-of-Being  which  belongs  to
Dasein itself—the pre-ontological understanding of Being.

II: THE TWOFOLD TASK IN WORKING OUT THE QUESTION

OF BEING. METHOD AND DESIGN OF OUR INVESTIGATION

 

5. The Ontological Analytic of Dasein as Laying Bare the Horizon for

an Interpretation of the Meaning of Being in General
 

IN designating the tasks of ‘formulating’ the question of Being, we have
shown  not  only  that  we  must  establish  which  entity  is  to  serve  as  our
primary object of interrogation, but also that the right way of access to this
entity is one which we must explicitly make our own and hold secure. We
have already discussed which entity takes over the principal role within the
question of Being. But how are we, as it were, to set our sights towards this
entity,  Dasein,  both  as  something  accessible  to  us  and  as  something  to  be
understood and interpreted?

In demonstrating that Dasein is ontico-ontologically prior, we may have
misled the reader into supposing that this entity must also be what is given
as  ontico-ontologically  primary  not  only  in  the  sense  that  it  can  itself  be
grasped ‘immediately’, but also in that the kind of Being which it possesses
is presented just as ‘immediately’. Ontically, of course, Dasein is not only
close to us—even that which is closest: we are it, each of us, we ourselves.
In spite of this, or rather for just this reason, it is ontologically that which is
farthest. To be sure, its ownmost Being is such that it has an understanding
of that Being, and already maintains itself in each case as if its Being has
been interpreted in some manner. But we are certainly not saying that when
Dasein’s own Being is thus interpreted pre-ontologically in the way which
lies closest, this interpretation can be taken over as an appropriate clue, as if
this way of understanding Being is what must emerge when one’s ownmost
state of Being is considered(1) as an ontological theme. The kind of Being
which belongs to Dasein is rather such that, in understanding its own Being,
it has a tendency to do so in terms of that entity towards which it comports
itself proximally and in a way which is essentially constant—in terms of the
‘world’. In Dasein itself, and therefore in its own understanding of Being,

the  way  the  world  is  understood  is,  as  we  shall  show,  reflected  back
ontologically upon the way in which Dasein itself gets interpreted.
 

1. ‘Besinnung’. The earliest editions have ‘Bestimmung’ instead.

H. 16

 

Thus because Dasein is ontico-ontologically prior, its own specific state
of  Being  (if  we  understand  this  in  the  sense  of  Dasein’s  ‘categorial
structure’) remains concealed from it. Dasein is ontically ‘closest’ to itself
and ontologically farthest; but pre-ontologically it is surely not a stranger.

Here  we  have  merely  indicated  provisionally  that  an  Interpretation  of
this  entity  is  confronted  with  peculiar  difficulties  grounded  in  the  kind  of
Being  which  belongs  to  the  object  taken  as  our  theme  and  to  the  very
behaviour  of  so  taking  it.  These  difficulties  are  not  grounded  in  any
shortcomings of the cognitive powers with which we are endowed, or in the
lack of a suitable way of conceiving—a lack which seemingly would not be
hard to remedy.

in  philosophical  psychology, 

Not only, however, does an understanding of Being belong to Dasein, but
this  understanding  develops  or  decays  along  with  whatever  kind  of  Being
Dasein may possess at the time; accordingly there are many ways in which
it has been interpreted, and these are all at Dasein’s disposal. Dasein’s ways
of  behaviour,  its  capacities,  powers,  possibilities,  and  vicissitudes,  have
in
been  studied  with  varying  extent 
anthropology,  ethics,  and  ‘political  science’,  in  poetry,  biography,  and  the
writing  of  history,  each  in  a  different  fashion.  But  the  question  remains
whether  these  interpretations  of  Dasein  have  been  carried  through  with  a
primordial  existentiality  comparable  to  whatever  existentiell  primordiality
they  may  have  possessed.  Neither  of  these  excludes  the  other  but  they  do
not  necessarily  go  together.  Existentiell  interpretation  can  demand  an
existential  analytic,  if  indeed  we  conceive  of  philosophical  cognition  as
something possible and necessary. Only when the basic structures of Dasein
have  been  adequately  worked  out  with  explicit  orientation  towards  the
problem  of  Being  itself,  will  what  we  have  hitherto  gained  in  interpreting
Dasein get its existential justification.

Thus  an  analytic  of  Dasein  must  remain  our  first  requirement  in  the
question  of Being.  But in  that case  the  problem  of obtaining  and securing

the kind of access which will lead to Dasein, becomes even more a burning
one.  To  put  it  negatively,  we  have  no  right  to  resort  to  dogmatic
constructions and to apply just any idea of Being and actuality to this entity,
no  matter  how  ‘self-evident’  that  idea  may  be;  nor  may  any  of  the
‘categories’  which such an idea  prescribes be forced  upon  Dasein without
proper  ontological  consideration.  We  must  rather  choose  such  a  way  of
access  and  such  a  kind  of  interpretation  that  this  entity  can  show  itself  in
itself and from itself [an ihm selbst von ihm selbst her].

H. 17

 

And this means that it is to be shown as it is proximally and for the most
part—in its average everydayness.(1) In this everydayness there are certain
structures  which  we  shall  exhibit—not  just  any  accidental  structures,  but
essential  ones  which,  in  every  kind  of  Being  that  factical  Dasein  may
possess,  persist  as  determinative  for  the  character  of  its  Being.  Thus  by
having  regard  for  the  basic  state  of  Dasein’s  everydayness,  we  shall  bring
out the Being of this entity in a preparatory fashion.

if  anything 

When taken in this way, the analytic of Dasein remains wholly oriented
towards the guiding task of working out the question of Being. Its limits are
thus  determined.  It  cannot  attempt  to  provide  a  complete  ontology  of
Dasein,  which  assuredly  must  be  constructed 
like  a
‘philosophical’ anthropology is to have a philosophically adequate basis.(2)
If  our  purpose  is  to  make  such  an  anthropology  possible,  or  to  lay  its
ontological  foundations,  our  Interpretation  will  provide  only  some  of  the
‘pieces’, even though they are by no means inessential ones. Our analysis of
Dasein,  however,  is  not  only  incomplete;  it  is  also,  in  the  first  instance,
provisional.  It  merely  brings  out  the  Being  of  this  entity,  without
Interpreting  its meaning.  It  is  rather a preparatory  procedure by  which the
horizon for the most primordial way of interpreting Being may be laid bare.
Once  we  have  arrived  at  the  horizon,  this  preparatory  analytic  of  Dasein
will have to be repeated on a higher and authentically ontological basis.

We  shall  point  to  temporality(3)  as  the  meaning  of  the  Being  of  that
entity which we call “Dasein”. If this is to be demonstrated, those structures
of  Dasein  which  we  shall  provisionally  exhibit  must  be  Interpreted  over
again  as  modes  of  temporality.  In  thus  interpreting  Dasein  as  temporality,
however,  we  shall  not  give  the  answer  to  our  leading  question  as  to  the

meaning  of  Being  in  general.  But  the  ground  will  have  been  prepared  for
obtaining such an answer.
 

1.  ‘Und  zwar  soll  sie  das  Seiende  in  dem  zeigen,  wie  es  zunächst  und  zumeist  ist,  in  seiner
durchschnittlichen Alltäglichkeit.’ The phrase ‘zunächst und zumeist’ is one that occurs many times,
though Heidegger does not explain it until Section 71 (H. 370 below), where ‘Alltäglichkeit’ too gets
explained. On ‘zunächst’ see our note 1, H. 6.

2. The ambiguity of the pronominal references in this sentence and the one before it, reflects a
similar ambiguity in the German. (The English-speaking reader should be reminded that the kind of
philosophical ‘anthropology’ which Heidegger has in mind is a study of man in the widest sense, and
is not to be confused with the empirical sciences of ‘physical’ and ‘cultural’ anthropology.)

3.  ‘Zeitlichkeit’.  While  it  is  tempting  to  translate  the  adjective  ‘zeitlich’  and  the  noun
‘Zeitlichkeit’  by  their  most  obvious  English  cognates,  ‘timely’  and  ‘timeliness’,  this  would  be
entirely  misleading;  for  ‘temporal’  and  ‘temporality’  come  much  closer  to  what  Heidegger  has  in
mind, not only when he is discussing these words in their popular senses (as he does on the following
page)  but  even  when  he  is  using  them  in  his  own  special  sense,  as  in  Section  65  below.  (See
especially H. 326 below, where ‘Zeitlichkeit’ is defined.) On the other hand, he occasionally uses the
noun ‘Temporalität’ and the adjective ‘temporal’ in a sense which he will explain later (H. 19). We
shall translate these by ‘Temporality’ and ‘Temporal’, with initial capitals.

H. 18

 

We have already intimated that Dasein has a pre-ontological Being as its
ontically  constitutive  state.  Dasein is in  such  a  way  as  to    b  e    something
which  understands  something  like  Being.(1)  Keeping  this  interconnection
firmly in mind, we shall show that whenever Dasein tacitly understands and
interprets something like Being, it does so with time as its standpoint. Time
must be brought to light—and genuinely conceived—as the horizon for all
understanding of Being and for any way of interpreting it. In order for us to
discern this, time needs to be explicated primordially as the horizon for the
understanding of Being, and in terms of temporality as the Being of Dasein,
which understands Being. This task as a whole requires that the conception
of  time  thus  obtained  shall  be  distinguished  from  the  way  in  which  it  is
ordinarily  understood.  This  ordinary  way  of  understanding  it  has  become
explicit  in  an  interpretation  precipitated  in  the  traditional  concept  of  time,
which has persisted from Aristotle to Bergson and even later. Here we must
make clear that this conception of time and, in general, the ordinary way of
understanding it, have sprung from temporality, and we must show how this
has  come  about.  We  shall  thereby  restore  to  the  ordinary  conception  the
autonomy which is its rightful due, as against Bergson’s thesis that the time
one has in mind in this conception is space.

and 

entities 

(spatial 

‘non-temporal’ 

‘Time’  has  long  functioned  as  an  ontological—or  rather  an  ontical—
criterion for naïvely discriminating various realms of entities. A distinction
has been made between ‘temporal’ entities (natural processes and historical
and  numerical
happenings) 
relationships). We are accustomed to contrasting the ‘timeless’ meaning of
propositions with the ‘temporal’ course of propositional assertions. It is also
held  that  there  is  a  ‘cleavage’  between  ‘temporal’  entities  and  the  ‘supra-
temporal’ eternal, and efforts are made to bridge this over. Here ‘temporal’
always  means  simply  being  [seiend]  ‘in  time’—a  designation  which,
admittedly, is still pretty obscure. The Fact remains that time, in the sense
of ‘being [sein] in time’, functions as a criterion for distinguishing realms of
Being.  Hitherto  no  one  has  asked  or  troubled  to  investigate  how  time  has
come  to  have  this  distinctive  ontological  function,  or  with  what  right
anything  like  time  functions  as  such  a  criterion;  nor  has  anyone  asked
whether  the  authentic  ontological  relevance  which  is  possible  for  it,  gets
expressed when “time” is used in so naïvely ontological a manner. ‘Time’
has acquired this ‘self-evident’ ontological function ‘of its own accord’, so
to speak; indeed it has done so within the horizon of the way it is ordinarily
understood. And it has maintained itself in this function to this day.

In  contrast  to  all  this,  our  treatment  of  the  question  of  the  meaning  of
Being must enable us to show that the central problematic of all ontology is
rooted in the phenomenon of time, if rightly seen and rightly explained, and
we must show how this is the case.
 

1. ‘Dasein ist in der Weise, seiend so etwas wie Sein zu verstehen.’

H. 19

 

If Being is to be conceived in terms of time, and if, indeed, its various
modes  and  derivatives  are  to  become  intelligible  in  their  respective
modifications and derivations by taking time into consideration, then Being
itself (and not merely entities, let us say, as entities ‘in time’) is thus made
visible in its ‘temporal’ character. But in that case, ‘temporal’ can no longer
mean  simply  ‘being  in  time’.  Even  the  ‘non-temporal’  and  the  ‘supra-
temporal’ are ‘temporal’ with regard to their Being, and not just privatively
by  contrast  with  something  ‘temporal’  as  an  entity  ‘in  time’,  but  in  a
positive sense,  though  it  is  one  which  we  must  first  explain.  In  both  pre-

philosophical  and  philosophical  usage  the  expression  ‘temporal’  has  been
pre-empted  by 
the  following
the  signification  we  have  cited; 
investigations, however, we shall employ it for another signification. Thus
the  way  in  which  Being  and  its  modes  and  characteristics  have  their
meaning determined primordially in terms of time, is what we shall call its
“Temporal”  determinateness.(1)  Thus  the  fundamental  ontological  task  of
Interpreting Being as such includes working out the Temporality of Being.
In  the  exposition  of  the  problematic  of  Temporality  the  question  of  the
meaning of Being will first be concretely answered.

in 

time 

taking 

Because  Being  cannot  be  grasped  except  by 

into
consideration,  the  answer  to  the  question  of  Being  cannot  lie  in  any
proposition that is blind and isolated. The answer is not properly conceived
if  what  it  asserts  propositionally  is  just  passed  along,  especially  if  it  gets
circulated as a free-floating result, so that we merely get informed about a
‘standpoint’ which may perhaps differ from the way this has hitherto been
treated. Whether the answer is a ‘new’ one remains quite superficial and is
of no importance. Its positive character must lie in its being ancient enough
for us to learn to conceive the possibilities which the ‘Ancients’ have made
ready  for  us.  In  its  ownmost  meaning  this  answer  tells  us  that  concrete
ontological research must begin with an investigative inquiry which keeps
within the horizon we have laid bare; and this is all that it tells us.

If, then, the answer to the question of Being is to provide the clues for
our  research,  it  cannot  be  adequate  until  it  brings  us  the  insight  that  the
specific  kind  of  Being  of  ontology  hitherto,  and  the  vicissitudes  of  its
inquiries,  its  findings,  and  its  failures,  have  been  necessitated  in  the  very
character of Dasein.
 

1. ‘seine temporale Bestimmtheit’. See our note 3, H. 17 above.

6. The Task of Destroying the History of Ontology

 

 

H. 20

All research—and not least that which operates within the range of the
central  question  of  Being—is  an  ontical  possibility  of  Dasein.  Dasein’s
Being finds its meaning in temporality. But temporality is also the condition

which  makes  historicality  possible  as  a  temporal  kind  of  Being  which
Dasein itself possesses, regardless of whether or how Dasein is an entity ‘in
time’.  Historicality,  as  a  determinate  character,  is  prior  to  what  is  called
“history” (world-historical historizing).(1)

“Historicality”  stands  for  the  state  of  Being  that  is  constitutive  for
Dasein’s  ‘historizing’  as  such;  only  on  the  basis  of  such  ‘historizing’  is
anything like ‘world-history’ possible or can anything belong historically to
world-history. In its factical Being, any Dasein is as it already was, and it is
‘what’ it already was. It is its past, whether explicitly or not. And this is so
not only in that its past is, as it were, pushing itself along ‘behind’ it, and
that  Dasein  possesses  what  is  past  as  a  property  which  is  still  present-at-
hand and which sometimes has after-effects upon it: Dasein ‘is’ its past in
the  way  of  its own  Being,  which,  to  put  it  roughly,  ‘historizes’  out  of  its
future on each occasion.(2) Whatever the way of being it may have at the
time, and thus with whatever understanding of Being it may possess, Dasein
has grown up both  i n t o  and  i n  a traditional way of interpreting itself: in
terms  of  this  it  understands  itself  proximally  and,  within  a  certain  range,
constantly. By this understanding, the possibilities of its Being are disclosed
and  regulated.  Its  own  past—and  this  always  means  the  past  of  its
‘generation’—is  not  something  which  follows  along  after  Dasein,  but
something which already goes ahead of it.

This  elemental  historicality  of  Dasein  may  remain  hidden  from  Dasein
itself.  But  there  is  a  way  by  which  it  can  be  discovered  and  given  proper
attention. Dasein can discover tradition, preserve it, and study it explicitly.
The discovery of tradition and the disclosure of what it ‘transmits’ and how
this  is  transmitted,  can  be  taken  hold  of  as  a  task  in  its  own  right.  In  this
way  Dasein  brings  itself  into  the  kind  of  Being  which  consists  in
historiological  inquiry  and  research.  But  historiology—or  more  precisely
historicity(3)—is  possible  as  a  kind  of  Being  which  the  inquiring  Dasein
may  possess,  only  because  historicality  is  a  determining  characteristic  for
Dasein in the very basis of its Being.
 

1.  ‘weltgeschichtliches  Geschehen’.  While  the  verb  ‘geschehen’  ordinarily  means  to  ‘happen’,
and  will  often  be  so  translated,  Heidegger  stresses  its  etymological  kinship  to  ‘Geschichte’  or
‘history’.  To  bring  out  this  connection,  we  have  coined  the  verb  ‘historize’,  which  might  be
paraphrased  as  to  ‘happen  in  a  historical  way’;  we  shall  usually  translate  ‘geschehen’  this  way  in
contexts  where  history  is  being  discussed.  We  trust  that  the  reader  will  keep  in  mind  that  such
‘historizing’ is characteristic of all historical entities, and is not the sort of thing that is done primarily

by historians (as ‘philosophizing’, for instance, is done by philosophers). (On ‘world-historical’ see
H. 381 ff.)

2. ‘Das Dasein “ist” seine Vergangenheit in der Weise seines Seins, das, roh gesagt, jeweils aus

seiner Zukunft her “geschieht”.’

3. ‘Historizität’. Cf. note 2, H. 10 above.

If  this  historicality  remains  hidden  from  Dasein,  and  as  long  as  it  so
remains,  Dasein  is  also  denied  the  possibility  of  historiological  inquiry  or
the  discovery  of  history.  If  historiology  is  wanting,  this  is  not  evidence
against Dasein’s historicality; on the contrary, as a deficient mode(1) of this
state of Being, it is evidence for it. Only because it is ‘historical’ can an era
be unhistoriological.

H. 21

 

On  the  other  hand,  if  Dasein  has  seized  upon  its  latent  possibility  not
only of making its own existence transparent to itself but also of inquiring
into  the  meaning  of  existentiality  itself  (that  is  to  say,  of  previously
inquiring into the meaning of Being in general), and if by such inquiry its
eyes have been opened to its own essential historicality, then one cannot fail
to see that the inquiry into Being (the ontico-ontological necessity of which
we  have  already  indicated)  is  itself  characterized  by  historicality.  The
ownmost meaning of Being which belongs to the inquiry into Being as an
historical inquiry, gives us the assignment [Anweisung] of inquiring into the
history of that inquiry itself, that is, of becoming historiological. In working
out  the  question  of  Being,  we  must  heed  this  assignment,  so  that  by
positively  making  the  past  our  own,  we  may  bring  ourselves  into  full
possession of the ownmost possibilities of such inquiry. The question of the
meaning  of  Being  must  be  carried  through  by  explicating  Dasein
beforehand  in  its  temporality  and  historicality;  the  question  thus  brings
itself to the point where it understands itself as historiological.

Our  preparatory  Interpretation  of  the  fundamental  structures  of  Dasein
with  regard  to  the  average  kind  of  Being  which  is  closest  to  it  (a  kind  of
Being  in  which  it  is  therefore  proximally  historical  as  well),  will  make
manifest,  however,  not  only  that  Dasein  is  inclined  to  fall  back  upon  its
world (the world in which it is) and to interpret itself in terms of that world
by  its  reflected  light,  but  also  that  Dasein  simultaneously  falls  prey  to  the
tradition of which it has more or less explicitly taken hold.(2) This tradition

keeps  it  from  providing  its  own  guidance,  whether  in  inquiring  or  in
choosing. This holds true—and by no means least—for that understanding
which  is  rooted  in  Dasein’s  ownmost  Being,  and  for  the  possibility  of
developing it—namely, for ontological understanding.
 

1. ‘defizienter Modus’. Heidegger likes to think of certain characteristics as occurring in various
ways or ‘modes’, among which may be included certain ways of ‘not occurring’ or ‘occurring only to
an inadequate extent’ or, in general, occurring ‘deficiently’. It is as if zero and the negative integers
were to be thought of as representing ‘deficient modes of being a positive integer’.

2.  ‘…das  Dasein  hat  nicht  nur  die  Geneigtheit,  an  seine  Welt,  in  der  es  ist,  zu  verfallen  and
reluzent  aus  ihr  her  sich  auszulegen,  Dasein  verfällt  in  eins  damit  auch  seiner  mehr  oder  minder
ausdrücklich  ergriffenen  Tradition.’  The  verb  ‘verfallen’  is  one  which  Heidegger  will  use  many
times.  Though  we  shall  usually  translate  it  simply  as  ‘fall’,  it  has  the  connotation  of  deteriorating,
collapsing, or falling down. Neither our ‘fall back upon’ nor our ‘falls prey to’ is quite right: but ‘fall
upon’  and  ‘fall  on  to’,  which  are  more  literal,  would  be  misleading  for  ‘an…  zu  verfallen’;  and
though ‘falls to the lot of’ and ‘devolves upon’ would do well for ‘verfällt’ with the dative in other
contexts, they will not do so well here.

When tradition thus becomes master, it does so in such a way that what it
‘transmits’ is made so inaccessible, proximally and for the most part, that it
rather  becomes  concealed.  Tradition  takes  what  has  come  down  to  us  and
delivers  it  over  to  self-evidence;  it  blocks  our  access  to  those  primordial
‘sources’ from which the categories and concepts handed down to us have
been in part quite genuinely drawn.(1) Indeed it makes us forget that they
have had such an origin, and makes us suppose that the necessity of going
back  to  these  sources  is  something  which  we  need  not  even  understand.
Dasein  has  had  its  historicality  so  thoroughly  uprooted  by  tradition  that  it
confines  its  interest  to  the  multiformity  of  possible  types,  directions,  and
standpoints  of  philosophical  activity  in  the  most  exotic  and  alien  of
cultures;  and  by  this  very  interest  it  seeks  to  veil  the  fact  that  it  has  no
ground of its own to stand on. Consequently, despite all its historiological
interests  and  all  its  zeal  for  an  Interpretation  which  is  philologically
the  most
‘objective’  [“sachliche”],  Dasein  no 
elementary conditions which would alone enable it to go back to the past in
a positive manner and make it productively its own.

longer  understands 

H. 22

 

We have shown at the outset (Section 1) not only that the question of the
meaning of Being is one that has not been attended to and one that has been

inadequately formulated,  but  that it has become quite forgotten in  spite  of
all our interest in ‘metaphysics’. Greek ontology and its history—which, in
their numerous filiations and distortions, determine the conceptual character
of philosophy even today—prove that when Dasein understands either itself
or Being in general, it does so in terms of the ‘world’, and that the ontology
which  has  thus  arisen  has  deteriorated  [verfällt]  to  a  tradition  in  which  it
gets reduced to something self-evident—merely material for reworking, as
it was for Hegel. In the Middle Ages this uprooted Greek ontology became
a fixed body of doctrine. Its systematics, however, is by no means a mere
joining together of traditional pieces into a single edifice. Though its basic
conceptions of Being have been taken over dogmatically from the Greeks, a
great  deal  of  unpretentious  work  has  been  carried  on  further  within  these
limits.  With  the  peculiar  character  which  the  Scholastics  gave  it,  Greek
ontology  has,  in  its  essentials,  travelled  the  path  that  leads  through  the
‘metaphysics’  and
Disputationes  metaphysicae  of  Suarez 
transcendental  philosophy  of  modern 
the
foundations  and  the  aims  of  Hegel’s  ‘logic’.  In  the  course  of  this  history
certain distinctive domains of Being have come into view and have served
as  the  primary  guides  for  subsequent  problematics:  the  ego  cogito  of
Descartes,  the  subject,  the  “I”,  reason,  spirit,  person.  But  these  all  remain
uninterrogated  as  to  their  Being  and  its  structure,  in  accordance  with  the
thoroughgoing way in which the question of Being has been neglected. It is
rather  the  case  that  the  categorical  content  of  the  traditional  ontology  has
been  carried  over  to  these  entities  with  corresponding  formalizations  and
purely  negative  restrictions,  or  else  dialectic  has  been  called  in  for  the
purpose of Interpreting the substantiality of the subject ontologically.
 

times,  determining  even 

the 

to 

1.  In  this  passage  Heidegger  juxtaposes  a  number  of  words  beginning  with  the  prefix  ‘über-’:
‘übergibt’  (‘transmits’);  ‘überantwortet’  (‘delivers  over’);  ‘das  Überkommene’  (‘what  has  come
down to us’); ‘überlieferten’ (‘handed down to us’).

If the question of Being is to have its own history made transparent, then
this hardened tradition must be loosened up, and the concealments which it
has brought about(1) must be dissolved. We understand this task as one in
which  by  taking  the  question  of  Being  as  our  clue,  we  are  to  destroy  the
traditional  content  of  ancient  ontology  until  we  arrive  at  those  primordial
experiences in which we achieved our first ways of determining the nature
of Being—the ways which have guided us ever since.

H. 23

 

In thus demonstrating the origin of our basic ontological concepts by an
investigation in which their ‘birth certificate’ is displayed, we have nothing
to  do  with  a  vicious  relativizing  of  ontological  standpoints.  But  this
destruction is just as far from having the negative sense of shaking off the
ontological  tradition.  We  must,  on  the  contrary,  stake  out  the  positive
possibilities  of  that  tradition,  and  this  always  means  keeping  it  within  its
limits;  these  in  turn  are  given  factically  in  the  way  the  question  is
formulated at the time, and in the way the possible field for investigation is
thus bounded off. On its negative side, this destruction does not relate itself
towards the past; its criticism is aimed at ‘today’ and at the prevalent way
of  treating  the  history  of  ontology,  whether  it  is  headed  towards
doxography, towards intellectual history, or towards a history of problems.
But  to  bury  the  past  in  nullity  [Nichtigkeit]  is  not  the  purpose  of  this
destruction;  its  aim  is  positive; its  negative  function  remains  unexpressed
and indirect.

The  destruction  of  the  history  of  ontology  is  essentially  bound  up  with
the way the question of Being is formulated, and it is possible only within
such a formulation. In the framework of our treatise, which aims at working
out  that  question  in  principle,  we  can  carry  out  this  destruction  only  with
regard to stages of that history which are in principle decisive.

In  line  with  the  positive  tendencies  of  this  destruction,  we  must  in  the
first  instance  raise  the  question  whether  and  to  what  extent  the
Interpretation  of  Being  and  the  phenomenon  of  time  have  been  brought
together thematically in the course of the history of ontology, and whether
the problematic of Temporality required for this has ever been worked out
in  principle  or  ever  could  have  been.  The  first  and  only  person  who  has
gone  any  stretch  of  the  way  towards  investigating  the  dimension  of
Temporality or has even let himself be drawn hither by the coercion of the
phenomena  themselves  is  Kant.  Only  when  we  have  established  the
problematic of Temporality, can we succeed in casting light on the obscurity
of his doctrine of the schematism. But this will also show us why this area is
one  which  had  to  remain  closed  off  to  him  in  its  real  dimensions  and  its
central ontological function. Kant himself was aware that he was venturing
into an area of obscurity: ‘This schematism of our understanding as regards
appearances and their mere form is an art hidden in the depths of the human

soul,  the  true  devices  of  which  are  hardly  ever  to  be  divined  from  Nature
and laid uncovered before our eyes.’(i) Here Kant shrinks back, as it were,
in the face of something which must be brought to light as a theme and a
principle if the expression “Being” is to have any demonstrable meaning. In
the end, those very phenomena which will be exhibited under the heading
of ‘Temporality’ in our analysis, are precisely those most covert judgments
of  the  ‘common  reason’  for  which  Kant  says  it  is  the  ‘business  of
philosophers’ to provide an analytic.
 

i. I. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, pp. 180 f.

1. ‘…der durch sie gezeitigten Verdeckungen.’ The verb ‘zeitigen’ will appear frequently in later

chapters. See H. 304 and our note ad loc.

 

 

H. 24

In pursuing this task of destruction with the problematic of Temporality
as our clue, we shall try to Interpret the chapter on the schematism and the
Kantian  doctrine  of time, taking that chapter as our point of departure.  At
the same time we shall show why Kant could never achieve an insight into
the  problematic  of  Temporality.  There  were  two  things  that  stood  in  his
way: in the first place, he altogether neglected the problem of Being; and, in
connection  with  this,  he  failed  to  provide  an  ontology  with  Dasein  as  its
theme or (to put this in Kantian language) to give a preliminary ontological
analytic  of  the  subjectivity  of  the  subject.  Instead  of  this,  Kant  took  over
Descartes’  position  quite  dogmatically,  notwithstanding  all  the  essential
respect in which he had gone beyond him. Furthermore, in spite of the fact
that he was  bringing  the  phenomenon of time back into the  subject  again,
his  analysis  of  it  remained  oriented  towards  the  traditional  way  in  which
time  had  been  ordinarily  understood;  in  the  long  run  this  kept  him  from
working out the phenomenon of a ‘transcendental determination of time’ in
its own structure and function. Because of this double effect of tradition the
decisive connection between  time  and  the  ‘I  think’  was  shrouded  in  utter
darkness; it did not even become a problem.

In  taking  over  Descartes’  ontological  position  Kant  made  an  essential
omission: he failed to provide an ontology of Dasein. This omission was a
decisive  one  in  the  spirit  [im  Sinne]  of  Descartes’  ownmost  tendencies.
With the ‘cogito sum’ Descartes had claimed that he was putting philosophy

on a new and firm footing. But what he left undetermined when he began in
this ‘radical’ way, was the kind of Being which belongs to the res cogitans,
or—more  precisely—the  meaning  of  the  Being  of  the  ‘s  u  m’.(1)  By
working  out  the  unexpressed  ontological  foundations  of  the  ‘cogito  sum’,
we  shall  complete  our  sojourn  at  the  second  station  along  the  path  of  our
destructive retrospect of the history of ontology. Our Interpretation will not
only prove that Descartes had to neglect the question of Being altogether; it
will  also  show  why  he  came  to  suppose  that  the  absolute  ‘Being-certain’
[“Gewisssein”) of the cogito exempted him from raising the question of the
meaning of the Being which this entity possesses.
 

1. We follow the later editions in reading ‘der Seinssinn des “sum” ’. The earlier editions have an

anacoluthic ‘den’ for ‘der’.

H. 25

 

Yet  Descartes  not  only  continued  to  neglect  this  and  thus  to  accept  a
completely indefinite ontological status for the res cogitans sive mens sive
animus  [‘the  thing  which  cognizes,  whether  it  be  a  mind  or  spirit’]:  he
regarded  this  entity  as  a  fundamentum  inconcussum,  and  applied  the
medieval ontology to it in carrying through the fundamental considerations
of  his  Meditationes.  He  defined  the  res  cogitans  ontologically  as  an  ens;
and  in  the  medieval  ontology  the  meaning  of  Being  for  such  an  ens  had
been  fixed  by  understanding  it  as  an  ens  creatum.  God,  as  ens  infinitum,
was the ens  i n c r e a t u m. But createdness [Geschaffenheit) in the widest
sense  of  something’s  having  been  produced  [Hergestelltheit],  was  an
essential  item  in  the  structure  of  the  ancient  conception  of  Being.  The
seemingly new beginning which Descartes proposed for philosophizing has
revealed  itself  as  the  implantation  of  a  baleful  prejudice,  which  has  kept
later  generations  from  making  any  thematic  ontological  analytic  of  the
‘mind’ [“Gemütes”] such as would take the question of Being as a clue and
would at the same time come to grips critically with the traditional ancient
ontology.

Everyone who is acquainted with the middle ages sees that Descartes is
‘dependent’ upon medieval scholasticism and employs its terminology. But
with  this  ‘discovery’  nothing  is  achieved  philosophically  as  long  as  it
remains  obscure  to  what  a  profound  extent  the  medieval  ontology  has

influenced the way in which posterity has determined or failed to determine
the ontological character of the res cogitans. The full extent of this cannot
be  estimated  until  both  the  meaning  and  the  limitations  of  the  ancient
ontology have been exhibited in terms of an orientation directed towards the
question  of  Being.  In  other  words,  in  our  process  of  destruction  we  find
ourselves  faced  with  the  task  of  Interpreting  the  basis  of  the  ancient
ontology in the light of the problematic of Temporality. When this is done,
it will be manifest that the ancient way of interpreting the Being of entities
is oriented towards the ‘world’ or ‘Nature’ in the widest sense, and that it is
indeed  in  terms  of  ‘time’  that  its  understanding  of  Being  is  obtained.  The
outward evidence for this (though of course it is merely outward evidence)
is  the  treatment  of  the  meaning  of  Being  as  παρουσία  or  ουσία,  which
signifies,  in  ontologico-Temporal  terms,  ‘presence’  [“Anwesenheit”].(1)
Entities  are  grasped  in  their  Being  as  ‘presence’;  this  means  that  they  are
understood with regard to a definite mode of time—the ‘Present’.(2)

The problematic of Greek ontology, like that of any other, must take its
clues from Dasein itself. In both ordinary and philosophical usage, Dasein,
man’s  Being,  is  ‘defined’  as  the  ζώον  λόγον  έχον—as  that  living  thing
whose Being is essentially determined by the potentiality for discourse.(3)
λέγειν is the clue for arriving at those structures of Being which belong to
the  entities  we  encounter  in  addressing  ourselves  to  anything  or  speaking
about  it  [im  Ansprechen  und  Besprechen].  (Cf.  Section  7  B.)  This  is  why
the  ancient  ontology  as  developed  by  Plato  turns  into  ‘dialectic’.  As  the
the
ontological  clue  gets  progressively  worked  out—namely, 
‘hermeneutic’ of the λόγον—it  becomes  increasingly  possible  to  grasp  the
problem of Being in a more radical fashion. The ‘dialectic’, which has been
a genuine philosophical embarrassment, becomes superfluous.
 

in 

1. The noun ουσία is derived from one of the stems used in conjugating the irregular verb είναι,
(‘to be’); in the Aristotelian tradition it is usually translated as ‘substance’, though translators of Plato
are  more  likely  to  write  ‘essence’,  ‘existence’,  or  ‘being’.  Heidegger  suggests  that  ουσία  is  to  be
thought of as synonymous with the derivative noun παρουσία (‘being-at’, ‘presence’). As he points
out,  παρουσία  has  a  close  etymological  correspondence  with  the  German  ‘Anwesenheit’,  which  is
similarly derived from the stem of a verb meaning ‘to be’ (Cf. O.H.G. ‘wesan’) and a prefix of the
place  or  time  at  which  (‘an-’).  We  shall  in  general  translate  ‘Anwesenheit’  as  ‘presence’,  and  the
participle ‘anwesend’ as some form of the expression ‘have presence’.

2. ‘die “Gegenwart” ’. While this noun may, like παρουσία or ‘Anwesenheit’, mean the presence
of someone at  some  place  or  on  some  occasion,  it  more  often  means  the  present,  as  distinguished
from the past and the future. In its etymological root-structure, however, it means a waiting-towards.

While Heidegger seems to think of all these meanings as somehow fused, we shall generally translate
this noun as ‘the Present’, reserving ‘in the present’ for the corresponding adjective ‘gegenwärtig’.

3. The phrase ζώον λόγον έχον is traditionally translated as ‘rational animal’, on the assumption
that λόγος refers to the faculty of reason. Heidegger, however, points out that λόγος is derived from
the same root as the verb λέγειν (‘to talk’, ‘to hold discourse’); he identifies this in turn with νοεῖν
(‘to cognize’, ‘to be aware of’, ‘to know’), and calls attention to the fact that the same stem is found
in  the  adjective  διαλεκτικός  (‘dialectical’).  (See  also  H.  165  below.)  He  thus  interprets  λόγος  as
‘Rede’,  which  we  shall  usually  translate  as  ‘discourse’  or  ‘talk’,  depending  on  the  context.  See
Section 7 B below (H. 32 ff.) and Sections 34 and 35, where ‘Rede’ will be defined and distinguished
both from ‘Sprache’ (‘language’) and from ‘Gerede’ (‘idle talk’) (H. 160 ff.).

H. 26

 

That is why Aristotle ‘no longer has any understanding’ of it, for he has
put it on a more radical footing and raised it to a new level [aufhob]. λέγειν
itself—or rather νοεῖν, that simple awareness of something present-at-hand
in  its  sheer  presence-at-hand,(1)  which  Parmenides  had  already  taken  to
guide him in his own interpretation of Being—has the Temporal structure of
a  pure  ‘making-present’  of  something.(2)  Those  entities  which  show
themselves in this and  f o r  it, and which are understood as entities in the
most authentic sense, thus get interpreted with regard to the Present; that is,
they are conceived as presence (οὐσία).(3)

Yet the Greeks have managed to interpret Being in this way without any
explicit  knowledge  of  the  clues  which  function  here,  without  any
acquaintance with the fundamental ontological function of time or even any
understanding  of  it,  and  without  any  insight  into  the  reason  why  this
function  is  possible.  On  the  contrary,  they  take  time  itself  as  one  entity
among other entities, and try to grasp it in the structure of its Being, though
that way of understanding Being which they have taken as their horizon is
one which is itself naïvely and inexplicitly oriented towards time.

Within the framework in which we are about to work out the principles
of  the  question  of  Being,  we  cannot  present  a  detailed  Temporal
Interpretation of the foundations of ancient ontology, particularly not of its
loftiest and purest scientific stage, which is reached in Aristotle. Instead we
shall  give  an  interpretation  of  Aristotle’s  essay  on  time,(ii)  which  may  be
chosen as providing a way of discriminating the basis and the limitations of
the ancient science of Being.

Aristotle’s  essay  on  time  is  the  first  detailed  Interpretation  of  this
phenomenon  which  has  come  down  to  us.  Every  subsequent  account  of
time, including Bergson’s, has been essentially determined by it. When we

analyse the Aristotelian conception, it will likewise become clear, as we go
back, that the Kantian account of time operates within the structures which
Aristotle has set forth; this means that Kant’s basic ontological orientation
remains that of the Greeks, in spite of all the distinctions which arise in a
new inquiry.

The  question  of  Being  does  not  achieve  its  true  concreteness  until  we
have carried through the process of destroying the ontological tradition. In
this way we can fully prove that the question of the meaning of Being is one
that we cannot avoid, and we can demonstrate what it means to talk about
‘restating’ this question.

In  any  investigation  in  this  field,  where  ‘the  thing  itself  is  deeply
veiled’(iii) one must take pains not to overestimate the results. For in such
an inquiry one is constantly compelled to face the possibility of disclosing
an  even  more  primordial  and  more  universal  horizon  from  which  we  may
draw  the  answer to  the  question,  “What is ‘Being’?”  We  can  discuss  such
possibilities seriously and with positive results only if the question of Being
has been reawakened and we have arrived at a field where we can come to
terms with it in a way that can be controlled.
 

ii. Aristotle, Physica Δ 10-14, (217b 29—224a 17).
iii. I. Kant, op. cit., p. 121.

 

1. ‘…von etwas Vorhandenem in seiner puren Vorhandenheit...’ The adjective ‘vorhanden’ means
literally  ‘before  the  hand’,  but  this  signification  has  long  since  given  way  to  others.  In  ordinary
German usage it may, for instance, be applied to the stock of goods which a dealer has ‘on hand’, or
to the ‘extant’ works of an author; and in earlier philosophical writing it could be used, like the word
‘Dasein’  itself,  as  a  synonym  for  the  Latin  ‘existentia’.  Heidegger,  however,  distinguishes  quite
sharply  between  ‘Dasein’ and  ‘Vorhandenheit’,  using  the latter to designate a kind of Being which
belongs  to  things  other  than  Dasein.  We  shall  translate  ‘vorhanden’  as  ‘present-at-hand’,  and
‘Vorhandenheit’ as ‘presence-at-hand’. The reader must be careful not to confuse these expressions
with  our  ‘presence’  (‘Anwesenheit’)  and  ‘the  Present’  (‘die  Gegenwart’),  etc.,  or  with  a  few  other
verbs and adjectives which we may find it convenient to translate by ‘present’.

2. ‘…des reinen “Gegenwärtigens” von etwas’. The verb ‘gegenwärtigen’, which is derived from
the  adjective  ‘gegenwärtig’,  is  not  a  normal  German  verb,  but  was  used  by  Husserl  and  is  used
extensively by Heidegger. While we shall translate it by various forms of ‘make present’, it does not
necessarily  mean  ‘making  physically  present’,  but  often  means  something  like  ‘bringing  vividly  to
mind’.

3. ‘Das Seiende, das sich in ihm für es zeigt und das als das eigentliche Seiende verstanden wird,
erhält demnach seine Auslegung in Rücksicht auf—Gegen-wart, d.h. es ist als Anwesenheit (οὐσία)
begriffen.’  The  hyphenation  of  ‘Gegen-wart’  calls  attention  to  the  structure  of  this  word  in  a  way
which  cannot  be  reproduced  in  English.  See  note  2,  H.  25  above.  The  pronouns  ‘ihm’  and  ‘es’
presumably both refer back to λέγειν, though their reference is ambiguous, as our version suggests.

7. The Phenomenological Method of Investigation

 

 

H. 27

In  provisionally  characterizing  the  object  which  serves  as  the  theme  of
our investigation (the Being of entities, or the meaning of Being in general),
it seems that we have also delineated the method to be employed. The task
of ontology is to explain Being itself and to make the Being of entities stand
out in full relief. And the method of ontology remains questionable in the
highest  degree  as  long  as  we  merely  consult  those  ontologies  which  have
come  down  to  us  historically,  or  other  essays  of  that  character.  Since  the
term  “ontology”  is  used  in  this  investigation  in  a  sense  which  is  formally
broad, any attempt to clarify the method of ontology by tracing its history is
automatically ruled out.

When, moreover, we use the term “ontology”, we are not talking about
some definite philosophical discipline standing in interconnection with the
others. Here one does not have to measure up to the tasks of some discipline
that  has  been  presented  beforehand;  on  the  contrary,  only  in  terms  of  the
objective necessities of definite questions and the kind of treatment which
the ‘things themselves’ require, can one develop such a discipline.

With the question of the meaning of Being, our investigation comes up
against  the  fundamental  question  of  philosophy.  This  is  one  that  must  be
treated  phenomenologically.  Thus  our  treatise  does  not  subscribe  to  a
‘standpoint’  or  represent  any  special  ‘direction’;  for  phenomenology  is
nothing of either sort, nor can it become so as long as it understands itself.
The  expression  ‘phenomenology’  signifies  primarily  a  methodological
conception. This expression does not characterize the  w h a t  of the objects
of  philosophical  research  as  subject-matter,  but  rather  the  how  of  that
research. The more genuinely a methodological concept is worked out and
the more comprehensively it determines the principles on which a science is
to be conducted, all the more primordially is it rooted in the way we come
to  terms  with  the  things themselves,(1) and the  farther  is  it removed from
what we call “technical devices”, though there are many such devices even
in the theoretical disciplines.
 

1. The appeal to the ‘Sachen selbst’, which Heidegger presents as virtually a slogan for Husserl’s
phenomenology, is not easy to translate without giving misleading impressions. What Husserl has in
mind  is  the  ‘things’  that  words  may  be  found  to  signify  when  their  significations  are  correctly

intuited by the right kind of Anschauung. (Cf. his  Logische Untersuchungen, vol.  2,  part  1,  second
edition, Halle, 1913, p. 6.) We have followed Marvin Farber in adopting ‘the things themselves’. (Cf.
his The Foundation of Phenomenology, Cambridge, Mass., 1943, pp. 202-3.) The word ‘Sache’ will,
of course, be translated in other ways also.

H. 28

 

Thus  the  term  ‘phenomenology’  expresses  a  maxim  which  can  be
formulated as ‘To the things themselves!’ It is opposed to all free-floating
constructions  and  accidental  findings;  it  is  opposed  to  taking  over  any
conceptions  which  only  seem  to  have  been  demonstrated;  it  is  opposed  to
those  pseudo-questions  which  parade  themselves  as  ‘problems’,  often  for
generations  at  a  time.  Yet  this  maxim,  one  may  rejoin,  is  abundantly  self-
evident,  and  it  expresses,  moreover,  the  underlying  principle  of  any
scientific  knowledge  whatsoever.  Why  should  anything  so  self-evident  be
taken up explicitly in giving a title to a branch of research? In point of fact,
the  issue  here  is  a  kind  of  ‘self-evidence’  which  we  should  like  to  bring
closer  to  us,  so  far  as  it  is  important  to  do  so  in  casting  light  upon  the
procedure of our treatise. We shall expound only the preliminary conception
[Vorbegriff] of phenomenology.

This expression has two components: “phenomenon” and “logos”. Both
of  these  go  back  to  terms  from  the  Greek:  φαινόμενον  and  λόγος.  Taken
superficially,  the  term  “phenomenology”  is  formed  like  “theology”,
“biology”,  “sociology”—names  which  may  be  translated  as  “science  of
life”,  “science  of  society”.  This  would  make
God”,  “science  of 
phenomenology  the  science  of  phenomena.  We  shall  set  forth  the
preliminary conception  of phenomenology  by characterizing what one has
in mind in the term’s two components, ‘phenomenon’ and ‘logos’, and by
establishing the meaning of the name in which these are put together.  The
history of the word itself, which presumably arose in the Wolffian school, is
here of no significance.

A. The Concept of Phenomenon

 

 

H. 29

The Greek expression φαινόμενον, to which the term ‘phenomenon’ goes
back, is derived from the verb φαίνεσθαι, which signifies  “to  show  itself”.
Thus φαινόμενον means that which shows itself, the manifest [das, was sich
zeigt, das Sichzeigende, das Offenbare]. φαίνεσθαι itself is a middle-voiced
form which comes from φαίνω—to bring  to  the  light  of day,  to  put  in  the
light. Φαίνω comes from  the  stem φα—,  like φῶς,  the  light,  that which is
bright—in  other  words,  that  wherein  something  can  become  manifest,
visible  in  itself.  Thus  we  must  keep  in  mind  that  the  expression
‘phenomenon’  signifies  that  which  shows  itself  in  itself,  the  manifest.
Accordingly the φαινόμενα or ‘phenomena’  are  the  totality of what lies  in
the light of day or can be brought to the light—what the Greeks sometimes
identified simply with τὰ ὄντα (entities). Now an entity can show itself  f r o
m  itself [von ihm selbst her] in many ways, depending in each case on the
kind of access we have to it. Indeed it is even possible for an entity to show
itself as something which in itself it is not. When it shows itself in this way,
it  ‘looks  like  something  or  other’  [“sieht”...  “so  aus  wie...”]. This  kind  of
showing-itself is what we call “seeming” [Scheinen]. Thus in Greek too the
expression  φαινόμενον  (“phenomenon”)  signifies  that  which  looks  like
something,  that  which  is  ‘semblant’,  ‘semblance’  [das  “Scheinbare”,  der
“Schein”]. Φαινόμενον ἀγαθόν means something good which looks like, but
‘in  actuality’  is  not,  what  it  gives  itself  out  to  be.  If  we  are  to  have  any
further  understanding  of  the  concept  of  phenomenon,  everything  depends
on our seeing how what is designated in the first signification of φαινόμενον
(‘phenomenon’  as  that  which  shows  itself)  and  what  is  designated  in  the
second (‘phenomenon’ as semblance) are structurally interconnected. Only
when  the  meaning  of  something  is  such  that  it  makes  a  pretension  of
showing  itself—that  is,  of  being  a  phenomenon—can  it  show  itself  as
something  which  it  is  not;  only  then  can  it  ‘merely  look  like  so-and-so’.
When  φαινόμενον  signifies  ‘semblance’,  the  primordial  signification  (the
phenomenon  as  the  manifest)  is  already  included  as  that  upon  which  the
second  signification  is  founded.  We  shall  allot  the  term  ‘phenomenon’  to
this  positive  and  primordial  signification  of  φαινόμενον,  and  distinguish
“phenomenon”  from  “semblance”,  which  is  the  privative  modification  of
“phenomenon”  as  thus  defined.  But  what  both  these  terms  express  has
proximally nothing at all to do with what is called an ‘appearance’, or still
less a ‘mere appearance’.(1)
 

1.  ‘…was  man  “Erscheinung”  oder  gar  “blosse  Erscheinung”  nennt.’  Though  the  noun
‘Erscheinung’ and the verb ‘erscheinen’ behave so much like the English ‘appearance’ and ‘appear’
that  the  ensuing  discussion  presents  relatively  few  difficulties  in  this  respect  for  the  translator,  the
passage shows some signs of hasty construction, and a few comments may be helpful. We are told
several  times  that  ‘appearance’  and  ‘phenomenon’  are  to  be  sharply  distinguished;  yet  we  are  also
reminded  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  they  coincide,  and  even  this  sense  seems  to  be  twofold,
though it is not clear that Heidegger is fully aware of this. The whole discussion is based upon two
further  distinctions:  the  distinction  between  ‘showing’  (‘zeigen’)  and  ‘announcing’  (‘melden’)  and
‘bringing  forth’  (‘hervorbringen’),  and  the  distinction  between  (‘x’)  that  which  ‘shows  itself’  (‘das
Sichzeigende’) or which ‘does the announcing’ (‘das Meldende’) or which ‘gets brought forth’ (‘das
Hervorgebrachte’), and  (‘y’)  that  which  ‘announces  itself’  (‘das  Sichmeldende’)  or  which  does  the
bringing-forth.  Heidegger  is  thus  able  to  introduce  the  following  senses  of  ‘Erscheinung’  or
‘appearance’:

1a. an observable event y, such as a symptom which announces a disease x by showing itself, and

in or through which x announces itself without showing itself;

1b. y’s showing-itself;
2. x’s announcing-itself in or through y;
3a. the ‘mere appearance’ y which x may bring forth when x is of such a kind that its real nature

can never be made manifest;

3b.  the  ‘mere  appearance’  which  is  the  bringing-forth  of  a  ‘mere  appearance’  in  sense  3a.
Heidegger makes abundantly clear that sense 2 is the proper sense of ‘appearance’ and that senses 3a
and  3b  are  the  proper  senses  of  ‘mere  appearance’.  On  H.  30  and  31  he  concedes  that  sense  1b
corresponds to the primordial sense of ‘phenomenon’; but his discussion on H. 28 suggests that 1a
corresponds to this more accurately, and he reverts to this position towards the end of H. 30.

This is what one is talking about when one speaks of the ‘symptoms of a
disease’  [“Krankheitserscheinungen”].  Here  one  has  in  mind  certain
occurrences  in  the  body  which  show  themselves  and  which,  in  showing
themselves    a  s    thus  showing  themselves,  ‘indicate’  [“indizieren”]
something which does not show  itself. The  emergence [Auftreten]  of such
occurrences,  their  showing-themselves,  goes  together  with  the  Being-
present-at-hand  of  disturbances  which  do  not  show  themselves.  Thus
appearance,  as  the  appearance  ‘of  something’,  does  not  mean  showing-
itself; it means rather the announcing-itself by [von] something which does
not show itself, but which announces itself through something which does
show itself. Appearing is a not-showing-itself. But the ‘not’ we find here is
by  no  means  to  be  confused  with  the  privative  “not”  which  we  used  in
defining the structure of semblance.(1) What appears does not show  itself;
and  anything  which  thus  fails  to  show  itself,  is  also  something  which  can
never  s  e  e  m.(2)  All  indications,  presentations,  symptoms,  and  symbols
have  this  basic  formal  structure  of  appearing,  even  though  they  differ
among themselves.
 

1. ‘…als welches es die Struktur des Scheins bestimmt.’ (The older editions omit the ‘es’.)

2.  ‘Was  sich  in  der  Weise  nicht  zeigt,  wie  das  Erscheinende,  kann  auch  nie  scheinen.’  This
passage is ambiguous, but presumably ‘das Erscheinende’ is to be interpreted as the x, not our y. The
reader  should  notice  that  our  standardized  translation  of  ‘scheinen’  as  ‘seem’  is  one  which  here
becomes  rather  misleading,  even  though  these  words  correspond  fairly  well  in  ordinary  usage.  In
distinguishing between ‘scheinen’ and ‘erscheinen’, Heidegger seems to be insisting that ‘scheinen’
can  be  done  only  by  the  y  which  ‘shows  itself’  or  ‘does  the  announcing’,  not  by  the  x  which
‘announces itself’ in or through y, even though German usage does not differentiate these verbs quite
so sharply.

H. 30

 

In spite of the fact that ‘appearing’ is never a showing-itself in the sense
of “phenomenon”, appearing is possible only by reason of a showing-itself
of  something.  But  this  showing-itself,  which  helps  to  make  possible  the
appearing,  is  not  the  appearing  itself.  Appearing  is  an  announcing-itself
[das Sich-melden] through something that shows itself. If one then says that
with  the  word  ‘appearance’  we  allude  to  something  wherein  something
appears without being itself an appearance, one has not thereby defined the
concept of phenomenon: one has rather presupposed it. This presupposition,
however,  remains  concealed;  for  when  one  says  this  sort  of  thing  about
‘appearance’, the expression ‘appear’ gets used in two ways. “That wherein
something ‘appears’ ” means that wherein something announces itself, and
therefore does not show itself; and in the words [Rede] ‘without being itself
an  “appearance”  ’,  “appearance”  signifies  the  showing-itself.  But  this
showing-itself  belongs  essentially  to  the  ‘wherein’  in  which  something
announces  itself.  According  to  this,  phenomena  are  never  appearances,
though on the other hand every appearance is dependent on phenomena. If
one  defines  “phenomenon”  with  the  aid  of  a  conception  of  ‘appearance’
which is still unclear, then everything is stood on its head, and a ‘critique’
of phenomenology on this basis is surely a remarkable undertaking.

So  again  the  expression  ‘appearance’  itself  can  have  a  double
signification:  first,  appearing,  in  the  sense  of  announcing-itself,  as  not-
showing-itself;  and  next,  that  which  does  the  announcing  [das  Meldende
selbst]—that which in its showing-itself indicates something which does not
show itself. And finally one can use “appearing” as a term for the genuine
sense  of  “phenomenon”  as  showing-itself.  If  one  designates  these  three
different things as ‘appearance’, bewilderment is unavoidable.

But  this  bewilderment  is  essentially  increased  by  the  fact  that
‘appearance’  can  take  on  still  another  signification.  That  which  does  the

announcing—that  which,  in  its  showing-itself,  indicates  something  non-
manifest—may  be  taken  as  that  which  emerges  in  what  is  itself  non-
manifest, and which emanates [ausstrahlt] from it in such a way indeed that
the  non-manifest  gets  thought  of  as  something  that  is  essentially  never
manifest.  When  that  which  does  the  announcing  is  taken  this  way,
“appearance”  is  tantamount  to  a  “bringing  forth”  or  “something  brought
forth”, but something which does not make up the real Being of what brings
it forth: here we have an appearance in the sense of ‘mere appearance’. That
which does the announcing and is brought forth does, of course, show itself,
and in such a way that, as an emanation of what it announces, it keeps this
very  thing  constantly  veiled  in  itself.  On  the  other  hand,  this  not-showing
which  veils  is  not  a  semblance.  Kant  uses  the  term  “appearance”  in  this
twofold  way.  According  to  him  “appearances”  are,  in  the  first  place,  the
‘objects of empirical intuition’: they are what shows itself in such intuition.
But  what  thus  shows  itself  (the  “phenomenon”  in  the  genuine  primordial
sense)  is  at  the  same  time  an  ‘appearance’  as  an  emanation  of  something
which hides itself in that appearance—an emanation which announces.

H. 31

 

In  so  far  as  a  phenomenon  is  constitutive  for  ‘appearance’  in  the
signification  of  announcing  itself  through  something  which  shows  itself,
though  such  a  phenomenon  can  privatively  take  the  variant  form  of
semblance,  appearance  too  can  become  mere  semblance.  In  a  certain  kind
of lighting someone can look as if his cheeks were flushed with red; and the
redness which shows itself can be taken as an announcement of the Being-
present-at-hand of a fever, which in turn indicates some disturbance in the
organism.

“Phenomenon”, the showing-itself-in-itself; signifies a distinctive way in
which something can be encountered.(1) “Appearance”, on the other hand,
means a reference-relationship which  i s  in an entity itself,(2) and which is
such that what does the referring (or the announcing) can fulfil its possible
function  only  if  it  shows  itself  in  itself  and  is  thus  a  ‘phenomenon’.  Both
appearance  and  semblance  are  founded  upon  the  phenomenon,  though  in
different ways. The bewildering multiplicity of ‘phenomena’ designated by
the words “phenomenon”, “semblance”, “appearance”, “mere appearance”,

cannot be disentangled unless the concept of the phenomenon is understood
from the beginning as that which shows itself in itself.
 

1. ‘…eine ausgezeichnete Begegnisart von etwas.’ The noun ‘Begegnis’ is derived from the verb

‘begegnen’, which is discussed in note 2, H. 44 below.

2. ‘…einen seienden Verweisungsbezug im Seienden selbst...’ The verb ‘verweisen’, which we
shall  translate  as  ‘refer’  or  ‘assign’,  depending  upon  the  context,  will  receive  further  attention  in
Section 17 below. See also our note 2, H. 68 below.

If in taking the concept of “phenomenon” this way, we leave indefinite
which entities we consider as “phenomena”, and leave it open whether what
shows itself is an entity or rather some characteristic which an entity may
have in its Being, then we have merely arrived at the formal conception of
“phenomenon”. If by “that which shows itself” we understand those entities
which are accessible through the empirical “intuition” in, let us say, Kant’s
sense,  then  the  formal  conception  of  “phenomenon”  will  indeed  be
legitimately employed. In this usage “phenomenon” has the signification of
the ordinary conception of phenomenon. But this ordinary conception is not
the  phenomenological  conception.  If  we  keep  within  the  horizon  of  the
Kantian  problematic,  we  can  give  an  illustration  of  what  is  conceived
phenomenologically  as  a  “phenomenon”,  with  reservations  as  to  other
differences; for we may then say that that which already shows itself in the
appearance  as  prior  to  the  “phenomenon”  as  ordinarily  understood  and  as
accompanying  it  in  every  case,  can,  even  though  it  thus  shows  itself
unthematically, be brought thematically to show itself; and what thus shows
itself  in  itself  (the  ‘forms  of  the  intuition’)  will  be  the  “phenomena”  of
phenomenology.  For  manifestly  space  and  time  must  be  able  to  show
themselves in this way—they must be able to become phenomena—if Kant
is claiming to make a transcendental assertion grounded in the facts when
he says that space is the a priori “inside-which” of an ordering.(1)

If,  however,  the  phenomenological  conception  of  phenomenon  is  to  be
understood  at  all,  regardless  of  how  much  closer  we  may  come  to
determining  the  nature  of  that  which  shows  itself;  this  presupposes
inevitably  that  we  must  have  an  insight  into  the  meaning  of  the  formal
conception  of  phenomenon  and  its  legitimate  employment  in  an  ordinary
signification.—But  before  setting  up  our  preliminary  conception  of
phenomenology,  we  must  also  define  the  signification  of  λόγος  so  as  to

make clear in what sense phenomenology can be a ‘science of’ phenomena
at all.

B. The Concept of the  L o g o s

 

 

H. 32

In  Plato  and  Aristotle  the  concept  of  the  λόγος  has  many  competing
significations, with no basic signification positively taking the lead. In fact,
however, this is only a semblance, which will maintain itself as long as our
Interpretation  is  unable  to  grasp  the  basic  signification  properly  in  its
primary  content.  If  we  say  that  the  basic  signification  of  λόγος  is
“discourse”,(2)  then  this  word-for-word  translation  will  not  be  validated
until  we  have  determined  what  is  meant  by  “discourse”  itself.  The  real
signification  of  “discourse”,  which  is  obvious  enough,  gets  constantly
covered  up  by  the  later  history  of  the  word  λόγος,  and  especially  by  the
numerous  and  arbitrary  Interpretations  which  subsequent  philosophy  has
provided. Λόγος gets  ‘translated’  (and  this  means  that  it  is  always  getting
interpreted) as “reason”, “judgment”, “concept”, “definition”, “ground”, or
“relationship”.(3) But how can ‘discourse’ be so susceptible of modification
that λόγος  can  signify  all  the  things  we  have  listed,  and  in  good  scholarly
usage?  Even  if  λόγος  is  understood  in  the  sense  of  “assertion”,  but  of
“assertion”  as  ‘judgment’,  this  seemingly  legitimate  translation  may  still
miss the fundamental signification, especially if “judgment” is conceived in
a  sense  taken  over  from  some  contemporary  ‘theory  of  judgment’.  Λόγος
does not mean “judgment”, and it certainly does not mean this primarily—if
one  understands  by  ‘judgment”  a  way  of  ‘binding’  something  with
something  else,  or  the  ‘taking  of  a  stand’  (whether  by  acceptance  or  by
rejection).
 

1. Cf. Critique of Pure Reason(2), ‘Transcendental Aesthetic’, Section 1, p. 34.
2. On λόγος, ‘Rede’, etc., see note 3, H. 25 above.
3. ‘...Vernunft, Urteil, Begriff, Definition, Grund, Verhältnis.’

Λόγος as “discourse” means rather the same as δηλοῦν: to make manifest
what  one  is  ‘talking  about’  in  one’s  discourse.(1)  Aristotle  has  explicated
this  function  of  discourse  more  precisely  as  ἀποφαίνεσθαι.(iv)  The  λόγος

lets  something  be  seen  (φαίνεσθαι),  namely,  what  the  discourse  is  about;
and it does so either for the one who is doing the talking (the medium) or
for persons who are talking with one another, as the case may be. Discourse
‘lets  something  be  seen’  ἀπο…: that  is,  it  lets  us  see  something  from  the
very thing which the discourse is about.(2) In discourse (ἀποφανσις), so far
as it is genuine, what is said [was geredet ist] is drawn from what the talk is
about,  so  that  discursive  communication,  in  what  it  says  [in  ihrem
Gesagten],  makes  manifest  what  it  is  talking  about,  and  thus  makes  this
accessible to the other party. This is the structure of the λόγος as ἀποφανσις.
This mode of making manifest in the sense of letting something be seen by
pointing it out, does not go with all kinds of ‘discourse’. Requesting (εὐχή),
for instance, also makes manifest, but in a different way.
 

iv. Cf. Aristotle, De Interpretatione 1—6; also Metaphysica Z 4, and Ethica Nicomachea Z.

1. ‘…offenbar machen das, wovon in der Rede “die Rede” ist.’
2. ‘…von dem selbst her, wovon die Rede ist.’

 

 

H. 33

When  fully  concrete,  discoursing  (letting  something  be  seen)  has  the
character of speaking [Sprechens]—vocal proclamation in words. The λόγος
is  φωνή,  and  indeed,  φωνή  μετὰ  φαντασίας—an  utterance  in  which
something is sighted in each case.

And only because the function of the λόγος as ἀποφανσις lies  in  letting
something be seen by pointing it out, can the λόγος have the structural form
of σύνθεσις. Here “synthesis” does not mean a binding and linking together
of  representations,  a  manipulation  of  psychical  occurrences  where  the
‘problem’  arises  of  how  these  bindings,  as  something  inside,  agree  with
something  physical  outside.  Here  the  σύν  has  a  purely  apophantical
signification  and  means  letting  something  be  seen  in  its  togetherness
[Beisammen] with something—letting it be seen as something.

Furthermore,  because  the  λόγος  is  a  letting-something-be-seen,  it  can
therefore be true or false. But here everything depends on our steering clear
of any conception of truth which is construed in the sense of ‘agreement’.
This  idea  is  by  no  means  the  primary  one  in  the  concept  of  ἀλήθεια.  The
‘Being-true’ of the λόγος as ἀλήθεύειν means that in λέγειν as ἀποφαίνεσθαι
the  entities of  which one  is  talking  must  be  taken  out  of  their  hiddenness;

one  must  let  them  be  seen  as  something  unhidden  (ἀληθές);  that  is,  they
must  be  discovered.(1)  Similarly,  ‘Being  false’  (ψεύδεσαι)  amounts  to
deceiving  in  the  sense  of  covering  up  [verdecken]:  putting  something  in
front of something (in such a way as to let it be seen) and thereby passing it
off as something which it is not.

But because ‘truth’ has this meaning, and because the λόγος is a definite
mode  of  letting  something  be  seen,  the  λόγος  is  just not the  kind  of  thing
that  can  be  considered  as  the  primary  ‘locus’  of  truth.  If,  as  has  become
quite  customary  nowadays,  one  defines  “truth”  as  something  that  ‘really’
pertains  to  judgment,(2)  and  if  one  then  invokes  the  support  of  Aristotle
with  this  thesis,  not  only  is  this  unjustified,  but,  above  all,  the  Greek
conception  of  truth  has  been  misunderstood.  Αἴσθησις,  the  sheer  sensory
perception  of  something,  is  ‘true’  in  the  Greek  sense,  and  indeed  more
primordially than the λόγος which we have been discussing. Just as seeing
aims  at  colours,  any  αἴσθησις  aims  at  its  ἴδια  (those  entities  which  are
genuinely  accessible  only  through  it  and  for  it);  and  to  that  extent  this
perception is always true. This means that seeing always discovers colours,
and  hearing  always  discovers  sounds.  Pure  νοεῖν  is  the  perception  of  the
simplest determinate ways of Being which entities as such may possess, and
it perceives them just by looking at them.(3) This νοεῖν is what is ‘true’ in
the purest and most primordial sense; that is to say, it merely discovers, and
it  does  so  in  such  a  way  that  it  can  never  cover  up.  This  νοεῖν  can  never
cover  up;  it  can  never  be  false;  it  can  at  worst  remain  a  non-perceiving,
άγνοεῖν, not sufficing for straightforward and appropriate access.

H. 34

 

When  something  no  longer  takes  the  form  of  just  letting  something  be
seen,  but  is  always  harking  back  to  something  else  to  which  it  points,  so
that  it  lets  something  be  seen  as  something,  it  thus  acquires  a  synthesis-
structure, and with this it takes over the possibility of covering up.(4) The
‘truth of judgments’, however, is merely the opposite of this covering-up, a
secondary phenomenon of truth, with more than one kind of foundation.(5)
Both  realism  and  idealism  have—with  equal  thoroughness—missed  the
meaning  of  the  Greek  conception  of  truth,  in  terms  of  which  only  the
possibility  of  something  like  a  ‘doctrine  of  ideas’  can  be  understood  as
philosophical knowledge.

 

solchen.’

1. The Greek words for ‘truth’ (ἡ ἀλήθεια, τὸ ἀληθές are compounded of the privative prefix ἀ-
(‘not’) and the verbal stem -λαθ- (‘to escape notice’, ‘to be concealed’). The truth may thus be looked
upon as that which is un-concealed, that which gets discovered or uncovered (‘entdeckt’).
2. ‘Wenn man... Wahrheit als das bestimmt, was “eigentlich” dem Urteil zukommt...’
3.  ‘…das schlicht hinsehende Vernehmen der einfachsten Seinsbestimmungen  des Seienden als

4. ‘Was nicht mehr die Vollzugsform des reinen Sehenlassens hat, sondern je im Aufweisen auf
ein  anderes  rekurriert  und  so  je  etwas  als  etwas  sehen  lässt,  das  übernimmt  mit  dieser
Synthesisstruktur die Möglichkeit des Verdeckens.’

5.  ‘…ein  mehrfach  fundiertes  Phänomen  von  Wahrheit.’  A  ‘secondary’  or  ‘founded’
phenomenon  is  one  which  is  based  upon  something  else.  The  notion  of  ‘Fundierung’  is  one  which
Heidegger has taken over from Husserl. See our note 1, on H. 59 below.

And  because  the  function  of  the  λόγος  lies  in  merely  letting  something
be seen, in letting entities be perceived [im Vernehmenlassen des Seienden],
λόγος  can  signify  the  reason [Vernunft]. And  because,  moreover,  λόγος  is
used not only with the signification of λέγειν but also with that of λεγόμενον
(that which is exhibited, as such), and because the latter is nothing else than
the ὐποκείμενον which, as present-at-hand, already lies at the bottom [zum
Grunde] of any procedure of addressing oneself to it or discussing it, λόγος
qua λεγόμενον  means  the  ground,  the  ratio.  And  finally,  because  λόγος  as
λεγόμενον can also signify that which, as something to which one addresses
oneself,  becomes  visible  in  its  relation  to  something  in  its  ‘relatedness’,
λόγος acquires the signification of relation and relationship.(1)

This Interpretation of ‘apophantical discourse’ may suffice to clarify the

primary function of the λόγος.
 

1. Heidegger is here pointing out that the word λόγος is etymologically akin to the verb λέγειν,
which  has  among  its  numerous  meanings  those  of  laying  out,  exhibiting,  setting  forth,  recounting,
telling a tale, making a statement. Thus λόγος as λέγειν can be thought of as the faculty of ‘reason’
(‘Vernunft’) which makes such activities possible. But λόγος can also mean τὸ λεγόμενον (that which
is laid out, exhibited, set forth, told); in this sense it is the underlying subject matter (τὸ ὺποκείμενον)
to which one addresses oneself and which one discusses (‘Ansprechen und Besprechen’); as such it
lies ‘at the bottom’ (‘zum Grunde’) of what is exhibited or told, and is thus the ‘ground’ or ‘reason’
(‘Grund’) for telling it. But when something is exhibited or told, it is exhibited in its relatedness (‘in
seiner Bezogenheit’); and in this way λόγος as λεγόμενον comes to stand for just such a relation or
relationship  (‘Beziehung  und  Verhältnis’).  The  three  senses  here  distinguished  correspond  to  three
senses of the Latin ‘ratio’, by which λόγος was traditionally translated, though Heidegger explicitly
calls  attention  to  only  one  of  these.  Notice  that  ‘Beziehung’  (which  we  translate  as  ‘relation’)  can
also  be  used  in  some  contexts  where  ‘Ansprechen’  (our  ‘addressing  oneself’)  would  be  equally
appropriate.  Notice  further  that  ‘Verhältnis’  (our  ‘relationship’),  which  is  ordinarily  a  synonym  for
‘Beziehung’, can, like λόγος and ‘ratio’, also refer to the special kind of relationship which one finds
in  a  mathematical  proportion.  The  etymological  connection  between  ‘Vernehmen’  and  ‘Vernunft’
should also be noted.

C. The Preliminary Conception of Phenomenology

When  we  envisage  concretely  what  we  have  set  forth  in  our
Interpretation  of  ‘phenomenon’  and  ‘logos’,  we  are  struck  by  an  inner
relationship  between  the  things  meant  by  these  terms.  The  expression
“phenomenology”  may  be  formulated  in  Greek  as  λέγειν  τὰ  φαινόμενα,
where  λέγειν  means  ἀποφαίνεσθαι.  Thus  “phenomenology”  means
ἀποφαίνεσθαι  τὰ  φαινόμενα—to  let  that  which  shows  itself  be  seen  from
itself in the very way in which it shows itself from itself. This is the formal
meaning of that branch of research which calls itself “phenomenology”. But
here we are expressing nothing else than the maxim formulated above: ‘To
the things themselves!’

 

 

H. 35

the 

time 

ihrer 

Thus  the  term  “phenomenology”  is  quite  different  in  its  meaning  from
expressions  such  as  “theology”  and  the  like.  Those  terms  designate  the
objects  of  their  respective  sciences  according  to  the  subject-matter  which
they  comprise  at 
jeweiligen  Sachhaltigkeit].
[in 
‘Phenomenology’  neither  designates  the  object  of  its  researches,  nor
characterizes the subject-matter thus comprised. The word merely informs
us  of  the  “how”  with  which  what  is  to  be  treated  in  this  science  gets
exhibited and handled. To have a science ‘of’ phenomena means to grasp its
objects in such a way that everything about them which is up for discussion
must  be  treated  by  exhibiting  it  directly  and  demonstrating  it  directly.(1)
The  expression  ‘descriptive  phenomenology’,  which 
is  at  bottom
tautological,  has  the  same  meaning.  Here  “description”  does  not  signify
such a procedure as we find, let us say, in botanical morphology; the term
has  rather  the  sense  of  a  prohibition—the  avoidance  of  characterizing
anything  without  such  demonstration.  The  character  of  this  description
itself,  the  specific  meaning  of  the  λόγος,  can  be  established  first  of  all  in
terms of the ‘thinghood’ [“Sachheit”] of what is to be ‘described’—that is
to  say,  of  what  is  to  be  given  scientific  definiteness  as  we  encounter  it
phenomenally.  The  signification  of  “phenomenon”,  as  conceived  both
formally and in the ordinary manner, is such that any exhibiting of an entity
as  it  shows  itself  in  itself,  may  be  called  “phenomenology”  with  formal
justification.

 

1. ‘…in direkter Aufweisung und direkter Ausweisung...’

Now  what  must  be  taken  into  account  if  the  formal  conception  of
phenomenon is to be deformalized into the phenomenological one, and how
is  this  latter  to  be  distinguished  from  the  ordinary  conception?  What  is  it
that  phenomenology  is  to  ‘let  us  see’?  What  is  it  that  must  be  called  a
‘phenomenon’ in a distinctive sense? What is it that by its very essence is
necessarily 
theme  whenever  we  exhibit  something  explicitly?
Manifestly,  it  is  something  that  proximally  and  for  the  most  part  does  not
show itself at all: it is something that lies hidden, in contrast to that which
proximally and for the most part does show itself; but at the same time it is
something  that  belongs  to  what  thus  shows  itself,  and  it  belongs  to  it  so
essentially as to constitute its meaning and its ground.

the 

Yet that which remains hidden in an egregious sense, or which relapses
and gets covered up again, or which shows  itself only ‘in  disguise’, is  not
just  this  entity  or  that,  but  rather  the  Being  of  entities,  as  our  previous
observations have shown. This Being can be covered up so extensively that
it  becomes  forgotten  and  no  question  arises  about  it  or  about  its  meaning.
Thus  that  which  demands  that  it  become  a  phenomenon,  and  which
demands this in a distinctive sense and in terms of its ownmost content as a
thing,  is  what  phenomenology  has  taken  into  its  grasp  thematically  as  its
object.

Phenomenology  is  our  way  of  access  to  what  is  to  be  the  theme  of
ontology,  and  it  is  our  way  of  giving  it  demonstrative  precision.  Only  as
phenomenology, is  ontology possible.  In the  phenomenological conception
of  “phenomenon”  what  one  has  in  mind  as  that  which  shows  itself  is  the
Being of entities, its meaning, its modifications and derivatives.(1) And this
showing-itself  is  not  just  any  showing-itself,  nor  is  it  some  such  thing  as
appearing. Least of all can the Being of entities ever be anything such that
‘behind it’ stands something else ‘which does not appear’.

H. 36

 

‘Behind’ the phenomena of phenomenology there is essentially nothing
else;  on  the  other  hand,  what  is  to  become  a  phenomenon  can  be  hidden.
And just because the phenomena are proximally and for the most part not

given,  there  is  need  for  phenomenology.  Covered-up-ness  is  the  counter-
concept to ‘phenomenon’.

There are various ways in which phenomena can be covered up. In the
first place, a phenomenon can be covered up in the sense that it is still quite
undiscovered.  It 
is  neither  known  nor  unknown.(2)  Moreover,  a
phenomenon  can  be  buried  over  [verschüttet].  This  means  that  it  has  at
some  time  been  discovered  but  has  deteriorated  [verfiel]  to  the  point  of
getting covered up again. This covering-up can become complete; or rather
—and  as  a  rule—what  has  been  discovered  earlier  may  still  be  visible,
though only as a semblance. Yet so much semblance, so much ‘Being’.(3)
This  covering-up  as  a  ‘disguising’  is  both  the  most  frequent  and  the  most
dangerous,  for  here  the  possibilities  of  deceiving  and  misleading  are
especially stubborn. Within a ‘system’, perhaps, those structures of Being—
and their concepts—which are still available but veiled in their indigenous
character, may claim their rights. For when they have been bound together
constructively  in  a  system,  they  present  themselves  as  something  ‘clear’,
requiring  no  further  justification,  and  thus  can  serve  as  the  point  of
departure for a process of deduction.

1.  ‘Der  phänomenologische  Begriff  von  Phänomen  meint  als  das  Sichzeigende  das  Sein  des

Seienden, seinen Sinn, seine Modifikationen und Derivate.’

2.  ‘Über  seinen  Bestand  gibt  es  weder  Kenntnis  noch  Unkenntnis.’  The  earlier  editions  have
‘Erkenntnis’  where  the  latter  ones  have  ‘Unkenntnis’.  The  word  ‘Bestand’  always  presents
difficulties  in  Heidegger;  here  it  permits  either  of  two  interpretations,  which  we  have  deliberately
steered  between:  ‘Whether  there  is  any  such  thing,  is  neither  known  nor  unknown’,  and  ‘What  it
comprises is something of which we have neither knowledge nor ignorance.’

3. ‘Wieviel Schein jedoch, soviel “Sein”.’

The covering-up itself, whether in the sense of hiddenness, burying-over,
or disguise, has in turn two possibilities. There are coverings-up which are
accidental; there are also some which are necessary, grounded in what the
thing  discovered  consists  in  [der  Bestandart  des  Entdeckten].  Whenever  a
phenomenological  concept  is  drawn  from  primordial  sources,  there  is  a
possibility  that  it  may  degenerate  if  communicated  in  the  form  of  an
assertion. It gets understood in an empty way and is thus passed on, losing
its  indigenous  character,  and  becoming  a  free-floating  thesis.  Even  in  the
concrete work of phenomenology itself there lurks the possibility that what
has been primordially ‘within our grasp’ may become hardened so that we

can  no  longer  grasp  it.  And  the  difficulty  of  this  kind  of  research  lies  in
making it self-critical in a positive sense.

H. 37

 

The way in which Being and its structures are encountered in the mode
of phenomenon is one which must first of all be wrested from the objects of
phenomenology.  Thus  the  very  point  of  departure  [Ausgang]  for  our
analysis  requires  that  it  be  secured  by  the  proper  method,  just  as  much  as
does our access [Zugang] to the phenomenon, or our passage [Durchgang]
through  whatever  is  prevalently  covering  it  up.  The  idea  of  grasping  and
explicating  phenomena  in  a  way  which  is  ‘original’  and  ‘intuitive’
[“originären”  und  “intuitiven”]  is  directly  opposed  to  the  naïveté  of  a
haphazard, ‘immediate’, and unreflective ‘beholding’. [“Schauen”].

Now 

that  we  have  delimited  our  preliminary  conception  of
phenomenology, the terms ‘phenomenal’  and  ‘phenomenological’ can  also
be fixed in their signification. That which is given and explicable in the way
the  phenomenon  is  encountered  is  called  ‘phenomenal’;  this  is  what  we
have  in  mind  when  we  talk  about  “phenomenal  structures”.  Everything
which belongs to the species of exhibiting and explicating and which goes
to  make  up  the  way  of  conceiving  demanded  by  this  research,  is  called
‘phenomenological’.

Because  phenomena,  as  understood  phenomenologically,  are  never
anything but what goes to make up Being, while Being is in every case the
Being of some entity, we must first bring forward the entities themselves if
it is our aim that Being should be laid bare; and we must do this in the right
way. These entities must likewise show themselves with the kind of access
which genuinely belongs to them. And in this way the ordinary conception
of phenomenon becomes phenomenologically relevant. If our analysis is to
be  authentic,  its  aim  is  such  that  the  prior  task  of  assuring  ourselves
‘phenomenologically’  of  that  entity  which  is  to  serve  as  our  example,  has
already been prescribed as our point of departure.

With  regard  to  its  subject-matter,  phenomenology  is  the  science  of  the
Being of entities—ontology. In explaining the tasks of ontology we found it
necessary that there should be a fundamental ontology taking as its theme
that  entity  which  is  ontologico-ontically  distinctive,  Dasein,  in  order  to
confront  the  cardinal  problem—the  question  of  the  meaning  of  Being  in

that 

investigation 

itself  will  show 

the  meaning  of
general.  Our 
phenomenological description as a method lies in interpretation. The λόγος
of the phenomenology of Dasein has the character of a ἐρμηνεύειν, through
which  the  authentic  meaning  of  Being,  and  also  those  basic  structures  of
Being  which  Dasein  itself  possesses,  are  made  known  to  Dasein’s
understanding of Being. The phenomenology of Dasein is a hermeneutic in
the  primordial  signification  of  this  word,  where  it  designates  this  business
of interpreting. But to the extent that by uncovering the meaning of Being
and the basic structures of Dasein in general we may exhibit the horizon for
any  further  ontological  study  of  those  entities  which  do  not  have  the
character of Dasein, this hermeneutic also becomes a ‘hermeneutic’ in the
sense  of  working  out  the  conditions  on  which  the  possibility  of  any
ontological investigation depends. And finally, to the extent that Dasein, as
an  entity  with  the  possibility  of  existence,  has  ontological  priority  over
every  other  entity,  “hermeneutic”,  as  an  interpretation  of  Dasein’s  Being,
has  the  third  and  specific  sense  of  an  analytic  of  the  existentiality  of
existence;  and  this  is  the  sense  which  is  philosophically  primary. Then  so
far as this hermeneutic works out Dasein’s historicality ontologically as the
ontical condition for the possibility of historiology, it contains the roots of
what  can  be  called  ‘hermeneutic’  only  in  a  derivative  sense:  the
methodology  of  those  humane  sciences  which  are  historiological  in
character.

H. 38

 

Being, as the basic theme of philosophy, is no class or genus of entities;
yet  it  pertains  to  every  entity.  Its  ‘universality’  is  to  be  sought  higher  up.
Being and the structure of Being lie beyond every entity and every possible
character which an entity may possess. Being is the  t r a n s c e n d e n s
 pure and simple.(1) And the transcendence of Dasein’s Being is distinctive
in  that  it  implies  the  possibility  and  the  necessity  of  the  most  radical
is
individuation.  Every  disclosure  of  Being  as 
transcendental  knowledge.  Phenomenological  truth  (the  disclosedness  of
Being) is  v e r i t a s  t r a n s c e n d e n t a l i s.

transcendens 

the 

Ontology  and  phenomenology  are  not  two  distinct  philosophical
disciplines  among  others.  These  terms  characterize  philosophy  itself  with
regard  to  its  object  and  its  way  of  treating  that  object.  Philosophy  is

universal  phenomenological  ontology,  and  takes  its  departure  from  the
hermeneutic of Dasein, which, as an analytic of existence, has made fast the
guiding-line for all philosophical inquiry at the point where it arises and to
which it returns.

The following investigation would not have been possible if the ground
had  not  been  prepared  by  Edmund  Husserl,  with  whose  Logische
Untersuchungen  phenomenology  first  emerged.  Our  comments  on  the
preliminary  conception  of  phenomenology  have  shown  that  what  is
essential  in  it  does  not  lie  in  its  actuality  as  a  philosophical  ‘movement’
[“Richtung”].  Higher  than  actuality  stands  possibility.  We  can  understand
phenomenology only by seizing upon it as a possibility.(v)
 

v. If the following investigation has taken any steps forward in disclosing the ‘things themselves’,
the author must first of all thank E. Husserl, who, by providing his own incisive personal guidance
and  by  freely  turning  over  his  unpublished  investigations,  familiarized  the  author  with  the  most
diverse areas of phenomenological research during his student years in Freiburg.
 

1.  ‘Sein  und  Seinsstruktur  liegen  über  jedes  Seiende  and  jede  mögliche  seiende  Bestimmtheit

eines Seienden hinaus. Sein ist das transcendens schlechthin.’

H. 39

 

With  regard  to  the  awkwardness  and  ‘inelegance’  of  expression  in  the
analyses  to  come,  we  may  remark  that  it  is  one  thing  to  give  a  report  in
which we tell about entities, but another to grasp entities in their Being. For
the  latter  task  we  lack  not  only  most  of  the  words  but,  above  all,  the
‘grammar’. If we may allude to some earlier researches on the analysis of
Being,  incomparable  on  their  own  level,  we  may  compare  the  ontological
sections of Plato’s Parmenides or the fourth chapter of the seventh book of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics with  a  narrative  section  from  Thucydides;  we  can
then see the altogether unprecedented character of those formulations which
were  imposed  upon  the  Greeks  by  their  philosophers.  And  where  our
powers are essentially weaker, and where moreover the area of Being to be
disclosed is ontologically far more difficult than that which was presented
to the Greeks, the harshness of our expression will be enhanced, and so will
the minuteness of detail with which our concepts are formed.

8. Design of the Treatise

 

The  question  of  the  meaning  of  Being  is  the  most  universal  and  the
emptiest of questions, but at the same time it is possible to individualize it
very  precisely  for  any  particular  Dasein.  If  we  are  to  arrive  at  the  basic
concept  of  ‘Being’  and  to  outline  the  ontological  conceptions  which  it
requires and the variations which it necessarily undergoes, we need a clue
which is concrete. We shall proceed towards the concept of Being by way
of  an  Interpretation  of  a  certain  special  entity,  Dasein,  in  which  we  shall
arrive at the horizon for the understanding of Being and for the possibility
of interpreting it; the universality of the concept of Being is not belied by
the  relatively  ‘special’  character  of  our  investigation.  But  this  very  entity,
Dasein, is in itself ‘historical’, so that its own-most ontological elucidation
necessarily becomes an ‘historiological’ Interpretation.

Accordingly  our  treatment  of  the  question  of  Being  branches  out  into

two distinct tasks, and our treatise will thus have two parts:

Part  One: the  Interpretation  of  Dasein  in  terms  of  temporality,  and  the

explication of time as the transcendental horizon for the question of Being.

Part  Two:  basic  features  of  a  phenomenological  destruction  of  the

history of ontology, with the problematic of Temporality as our clue.

Part One has three divisions:
1. the preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein;
2. Dasein and temporality;
3. time and Being.(1)

H. 40

 

Part Two likewise has three divisions(1):
1. Kant’s  doctrine  of  schematism  and  time,  as  a  preliminary  stage  in  a

problematic of Temporality;

2.  the  ontological  foundation  of  Descartes’  ‘cogito  sum’,  and  how  the
medieval  ontology  has  been  taken  over  into  the  problematic  of  the  ‘res
cogitans’;

3. Aristotle’s essay on time, as providing a way of discriminating 

the phenomenal basis and the limits of ancient ontology.

 

1. Part Two and the third division of Part One have never appeared.

PART ONE: THE INTERPRETATION OF DASEIN IN TERMS
OF TEMPORALITY, AND THE EXPLICATION OF TIME AS THE
TRANSCENDENTAL HORIZON FOR THE QUESTION OF BEING
 

DIVISION ONE: PREPARATORY FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS

OF DASEIN

 

 

H. 41

IN  the  question  about  the  meaning  of  Being,  what  is  primarily
interrogated  is  those  entities  which  have  the  character  of  Dasein.  The
preparatory  existential  analytic  of  Dasein  must,  in  accordance  with  its
peculiar  character,  be  expounded  in  outline,  and  distinguished  from  other
kinds of investigation which seem to run parallel (Chapter 1). Adhering to
the procedure which we have fixed upon for starting our investigation, we
must  lay  bare  a  fundamental  structure  in  Dasein:  Being-in-the-world
(Chapter 2). In  the  interpretation  of  Dasein,  this  structure  is  something  ‘a
priori’; it is not pieced together, but is primordially and constantly a whole.
It  affords  us,  however,  various  ways  of  looking  at  the  items  which  are
constitutive for it. The whole of this structure always comes first; but if we
keep  this  constantly  in  view,  these  items,  as  phenomena,  will  be  made  to
stand  out.  And  thus  we  shall  have  as  objects  for  analysis:  the  world  in  its
worldhood (Chapter 3), Being-in-the-world as Being-with and Being-one’s-
Self  (Chapter  4),  and  Being-in  as  such  (Chapter  5).  By  analysis  of  this
fundamental structure, the Being of Dasein can be indicated provisionally.
Its existential meaning is care (Chapter 6).

I: EXPOSITION OF THE TASK OF A PREPARATORY

ANALYSIS OF DASEIN

 

 

 

H. 42

9. The Theme of the Analytic of Dasein

WE  are  ourselves  the  entities  to  be  analysed.  The  Being  of  any  such
entity  is  in  each  case  mine.(1)  These  entities,  in  their  Being,  comport
themselves  towards  their  Being.  As  entities  with  such  Being,  they  are
delivered  over  to  their  own  Being.(2)  Being  is  that  which  is  an  issue  for
every  such  entity.(3)  This  way  of  characterizing  Dasein  has  a  double
consequence:
 

1. ‘Das Seiende, dessen Analyse zur Aufgabe steht, sind wir je selbst. Das Sein dieses Seienden
ist  je  meines.’  The  reader  must  not  get  the  impression  that  there  is  anything  solipsistic  about  the
second of these sentences. The point is merely that the kind of Being which belongs to Dasein is of a
sort which any of us may call his own.

2. ‘Als Seiendes dieses Seins ist es seinem eigenen Sein überantwortet.’ The earlier editions read

‘...seinem eigenen Zu-sein...’
3. See note 2, H. 8 above.

1. The ‘essence’ [“Wesen”] of this entity lies in its “to be” [Zu-sein]. Its
Being-what-it-is [Was-sein] (essentia) must, so far as we can speak of it at
all, be conceived in terms of its Being (existentia). But here our ontological
task is to show that when we choose to designate the Being of this entity as
“existence” [Existenz], this term does not and cannot have the ontological
signification of the traditional term “existentia”; ontologically, existentia is
tantamount  of Being-present-at-hand,  a kind  of Being  which is  essentially
inappropriate to entities of Dasein’s character. To avoid getting bewildered,
we  shall  always  use  the  Interpretative  expression  “presence-at-hand”  for
the term “existentia”, while the term “existence”, as a designation of Being,
will be allotted solely to Dasein.

The  ‘essence’  of  Dasein  lies  in  its  existence.  Accordingly  those
characteristics  which  can  be  exhibited  in  this  entity  are  not  ‘properties’
present-at-hand of some entity which ‘looks’ so and so and is itself present-
at-hand; they are in each case possible ways for it to be, and no more than
that. All the Being-as-it-is [So-sein] which this entity possesses is primarily
Being.  So  when  we  designate  this  entity  with  the  term  ‘Dasein’,  we  are
expressing not its “what” (as if it were a table, house or tree) but its Being.

2. That Being which is an issue for this entity in its very Being, is in each
case mine. Thus Dasein is never to be taken ontologically as an instance or
special case of some genus of entities as things that are present-at-hand.(1)
To  entities  such  as  these,  their  Being  is  ‘a  matter  of  indifference’;(2)  or
more precisely, they  ‘are’ such that their  Being  can be neither  a matter of
indifference  to  them,  nor  the  opposite.  Because  Dasein  has  in  each  case
mineness [Jemeinigkeit], one must always use a personal pronoun when one
addresses it: ‘I am’, ‘you are’.

Furthermore,  in  each  case  Dasein  is  mine  to  be  in  one  way  or  another.
Dasein has always made some sort of decision as to the way in which it is
in each case mine [je meines]. That entity which in its Being has this very
Being  as  an  issue,  comports  itself  towards  its  Being  as  its  ownmost
possibility. In each case Dasein is its possibility, and it ‘has’ this possibility,
but  not  just  as  a  property  [eigenschaftlich],  as  something  present-at-hand
would. And because Dasein is in each case essentially its own possibility, it
can, in its very Being, ‘choose’ itself and win itself; it can also lose itself
and  never  win  itself;  or  only  ‘seem’  to  do  so.  But  only  in  so  far  as  it  is
essentially  something  which  can  be  authentic—that  is,  something  of  its
own(3)—can it have lost itself and not yet won itself. As modes of Being,
authenticity  and  inauthenticity  (these  expressions  have  been  chosen
terminologically  in  a  strict  sense)  are  both  grounded  in  the  fact  that  any
Dasein  whatsoever  is  characterized  by  mineness.(4)  But  the  inauthenticity
of Dasein does not signify any ‘less’ Being or any ‘lower’ degree of Being.
Rather  it  is  the  case  that  even  in  its  fullest  concretion  Dasein  can  be
characterized by inauthenticity—when busy, when excited, when interested,
when ready for joyment.
 

1.  ‘…als  Vorhandenem’.  The  earlier  editions  have  the  adjective  ‘vorhandenem’  instead  of  the

substantive.

2.  ‘gleichgültig’.  This  adjective  must  be  distinguished  from  the  German  adjective  ‘indifferent’,
though they might both ordinarily be translated by the English ‘indifferent’, which we shall reserve

exclusively  for  the  former.  In  most  passages,  the  latter  is  best  translated  by  ‘undifferentiated’  or
‘without  further  differentiation’;  occasionally,  however,  it  seems  preferable  to  translate  it  by
‘Indifferent’  with  an  initial  capital.  We  shall  follow  similar  conventions  with  the  nouns
‘Gleichgültigkeit’ and ‘Indifferenz’.

3. ‘Und weil Dasein wesenhaft je seine Möglichkeit ist, kann dieses Seiende in seinem Sein sich
selbst “wählen”, gewinnen, es kann sich verlieren, bzw. nie und nur “scheinbar” gewinnen. Verloren
haben kann es sich nur und noch nicht sich gewonnen haben kann es nur, sofern es seinem Wesen
nach  mögliches  eigentliches,  das  heisst  sich  zueigen  ist.’  Older  editions  have  ‘je  wesenhaft’  and
‘zueigenes’.  The  connection  between  ‘eigentlich’  (‘authentic’,  ‘real’)  and  ‘eigen’  (‘own’)  is  lost  in
translation.

4. ‘…dass Dasein überhaupt durch Jemeinigkeit bestimmt ist.’

H. 43

 

The two characteristics of Dasein which we have sketched—the priority
of ‘existentia’ over essentia, and the  fact that Dasein is  in  each case  mine
[die Jemeinigkeit]—have already indicated that in the analytic of this entity
we are facing a peculiar phenomenal domain. Dasein does not have the kind
of  Being  which  belongs  to  something  merely  present-at-hand  within  the
world, nor does it ever have it. So neither is it to be presented thematically
as something we come across in the same way as we come across what is
present-at-hand.  The  right  way  of  presenting  it  is  so  far  from  self-evident
that  to  determine  what  form  it  shall  take  is  itself  an  essential  part  of  the
ontological analytic of this entity. Only by presenting this entity in the right
way  can  we  have  any  understanding  of  its  Being.  No  matter  how
provisional  our  analysis  may  be,  it  always  requires  the  assurance  that  we
have started correctly.

In determining itself as an entity, Dasein always does so in the light of a
possibility  which  it  is  itself  and  which,  in  its  very  Being,  it  somehow
understands. This is the formal meaning of Dasein’s existential constitution.
But  this  tells  us  that  if  we  are  to  Interpret  this  entity  ontologically,  the
problematic  of  its  Being  must  be  developed  from  the  existentiality  of  its
existence. This cannot mean, however, that “Dasein” is to be construed in
terms  of  some  concrete  possible  idea  of  existence.  At  the  outset  of  our
analysis  it  is  particularly  important  that  Dasein  should  not  be  Interpreted
with  the  differentiated  character  [Differenz]  of  some  definite  way  of
existing, but that it should be uncovered [aufgedeckt] in the undifferentiated
character  which 
the  most  part.  This
undifferentiated  character  of  Dasein’s  everydayness  is  not  nothing,  but  a

it  has  proximally  and  for 

positive phenomenal characteristic of this entity. Out of this kind of Being
—and  back  into  it  again—is  all  existing,  such  as  it  is.(1)  We  call  this
everyday 
“averageness”
character 
[Durchschnittlichkeit].

undifferentiated 

of  Dasein 

H. 44

 

And  because  this  average  everydayness  makes  up  what  is  ontically
proximal  for  this  entity,  it  has  again  and  again  been  passed  over  in
explicating  Dasein.  That  which  is  ontically  closest  and  well  known,  is
ontologically  the  farthest  and  not  known  at  all;  and  its  ontological
signification is constantly overlooked. When Augustine asks: “Quid  autem
propinquius  meipso  mihi?”  and  must  answer:  “ego  certe  laboro  hic  et
laboro  in  meipso:  factus  sum  mihi  terra  difficultatis  et  sudoris  nimii”,(i)
this  applies  not  only  to  the  ontical  and  pre-ontological  opaqueness  of
Dasein but even more to the ontological task which lies ahead; for not only
must  this  entity  not  be  missed  in  that  kind  of  Being  in  which  it  is
phenomenally  closest,  but  it  must  be  made  accessible  by  a  positive
characterization.

Dasein’s  average  everydayness,  however,  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  mere
‘aspect’. Here too, and even in the mode of inauthenticity, the structure of
existentiality lies a priori. And here too Dasein’s Being is an issue for it in a
definite way; and Dasein comports itself towards it in the mode of average
everydayness, even if this is only the mode of fleeing in the face of it and
forgetfulness thereof.(2)
 

i. St. Augustine, Confessiones, X, 16. [‘But what is closer to me than myself? Assuredly I labour
here and I labour within myself; I have become to myself a land of trouble and inordinate sweat.’—
Tr.]
 

1. ‘Aus dieser Seinsart heraus und in sie zurück ist alles Existieren, wie es ist.’
2. ‘Auch in ihr geht es dem Dasein in bestimmter Weise um sein Sein, zu dem es sich im Modus
der durchschnittlichen Alltäglichkeit verhält und sei es auch nur im Modus der Flucht davor und des
Vergessens seiner.’ For further discussion, see Section 40 below.

But the explication of Dasein in its average everydayness does not give
us  just  average  structures  in  the  sense  of  a  hazy  indefiniteness.  Anything
which,  taken  ontically,  is  in  an  average  way,  can  be  very  well  grasped
structurally
ontologically 

structures  which  may  be 

in  pregnant 

indistinguishable  from  certain  ontological  characteristics  [Bestimmungen]
of an authentic Being of Dasein.

H. 45

 

All explicata to which the analytic of Dasein gives rise are obtained by
considering  Dasein’s  existence-structure.  Because  Dasein’s  characters  of
Being are defined in terms of existentiality, we call them “e x i s t e n t i a l i
a”. These are to be sharply distinguished from what we call “categories”—
characteristics of Being for entities whose character is not that of Dasein.(1)
Here  we  are  taking  the  expression  “category”  in  its  primary  ontological
signification, and abiding by it. In the ontology of the ancients, the entities
we  encounter  within  the  world(2)  are  taken  as  the  basic  examples  for  the
interpretation of Being. Νοεῖν (or the λόγος, as the case may be) is accepted
as  a  way  of  access  to  them.(3)  Entities  are  encountered  therein.  But  the
Being  of  these  entities  must  be  something  which  can  be  grasped  in  a
distinctive  kind  of  λέγειν  (letting  something  be  seen),  so  that  this  Being
becomes intelligible in advance as that which it is—and as that which it is
already  in  every  entity.  In  any  discussion  (λόγος)  of  entities,  we  have
previously  addressed ourselves to  Being; this addressing is κατηγορεῖσθαι.
(4) This  signifies,  in  the  first  instance,  making  a  public  accusation,  taking
someone  to  task  for  something  in  the  presence  of  everyone.  When  used
ontologically,  this  term  means  taking  an  entity  to  task,  as  it  were,  for
whatever  it  is  as  an  entity—that  is  to  say,  letting  everyone  see  it  in  its
Being.  The  κατηγορίαι  are  what  is  sighted  and  what  is  visible  in  such  a
seeing.(5)  They  include  the  various  ways  in  which  the  nature  of  those
entities which can be addressed and discussed in a λόγος may be determined
a  priori.  Existentialia  and  categories  are  the  two  basic  possibilities  for
characters of Being. The entities which correspond to them require different
kinds  of  primary  interrogation  respectively:  any  entity  is  either  a  “who”
(existence)  or  a  “what”  (presence-at-hand  in  the  broadest  sense).  The
connection between these two modes of the characters of Being cannot be
handled until the horizon for the question of Being has been clarified.
 

1. ‘Weil sie sich aus der Existenzialität bestimmen, nennen wir die Seinscharaktere des Daseins
Existenzialien.  Sie  sind  scharf  zu  trennen  von  den  Seinsbestimmungen  des  nicht  daseinsmässigen
Seienden, die wir Kategorien nennen.’

2.  ‘…das  innerhalb  der  Welt  begegnende  Seiende.’  More  literally:  ‘the  entity  that  encounters
within  the  world.’  While  Heidegger  normally  uses  the  verb  ‘begegnen’  in  this  active  intransitive
sense, a similar construction with the English ‘encounter’ is unidiomatic and harsh. We shall as a rule
use either a passive construction (as in ‘entities encountered’) or an active transitive construction (as
in ‘entities we encounter’).

3.  ‘Als  Zugangsart  zu  ihm  gilt  das  νοεῖν  bzw.  der  λόγος.’  Here  we  follow  the  reading  of  the
earlier  editions.  In  the  later  editions,  ‘Zugangsart’,  which  is  used  rather  often,  is  here  replaced  by
‘Zugangsort’,  which  occurs  very  seldom  and  is  perhaps  a  misprint.  This  later  version  might  be
translated as follows: ‘νοεῖν (or the λόγος, as the case may be) is accepted as the locus of access to
such entities.’ On νοεῖν and λόγος see Section 7 above, especially H. 32-34.

4. ‘Das je schon vorgängige Ansprechen des Seins im Besprechen (λόγος) des  Seienden  ist  das

κατηγορεῖσθαι.’

5. ‘Das in solchem Sehen Gesichtete und Sichtbare...’ On ‘Sehen’ and ‘Sicht’ see H. 147.

In  our  introduction  we  have  already  intimated  that  in  the  existential
analytic of Dasein we also make headway with a task which is hardly less
pressing  than  that  of  the  question  of  Being  itself—the  task  of  laying  bare
that a priori basis which must be visible before the question of ‘what man
is’  can  be  discussed  philosophically.  The  existential  analytic  of  Dasein
comes  before  any  psychology  or  anthropology,  and  certainly  before  any
biology. While these too are ways in which Dasein can be investigated, we
can define the theme of our analytic with greater precision if we distinguish
it from these. And at the same time the necessity of that analytic can thus be
proved more incisively.

10.  How  the  Analytic  of  Dasein  is  to  be  Distinguished  from

Anthropology, Psychology, and Biology
 

After  a  theme  for  investigation  has  been  initially  outlined  in  positive
terms, it is always important to show what is to be ruled out, although it can
easily  become  fruitless  to  discuss  what  is  not  going  to  happen.  We  must
show that those investigations and formulations of the question which have
been  aimed  at  Dasein  heretofore,  have  missed  the  real  philosophical
problem (notwithstanding their objective fertility), and that as long as they
persist in missing it, they have no right to claim that they can accomplish
that  for  which  they  are  basically  striving.  In  distinguishing  the  existential
analytic  from  anthropology,  psychology,  and  biology,  we  shall  confine
ourselves  to  what  is  in  principle  the  ontological  question.  Our  distinctions
will  necessarily  be  inadequate  from  the  standpoint  of  ‘scientific  theory’

simply  because  the  scientific  structure  of  the  above-mentioned  disciplines
(not, indeed, the ‘scientific attitude’ of those who work to advance them) is
today thoroughly questionable and needs to be attacked in new ways which
must have their source in ontological problematics.

H. 46

 

Historiologically, the aim of the existential analytic can be made plainer
by  considering  Descartes,  who  is  credited  with  providing  the  point  of
departure for modern philosophical inquiry by his discovery of the “cogito
sum”.  He  investigates  the  “cogitare”  of  the  “ego”,  at  least  within  certain
limits. On the other hand, he leaves the “sum” completely undiscussed, even
though  it  is  regarded  as  no  less  primordial  that  the  cogito.  Our  analytic
raises  the  ontological  question  of  the  Being  of  the  “sum”.  Not  until  the
nature  of  this  Being  has  been  determined  can  we  grasp  the  kind  of  Being
which belongs to cogitationes.

the 

the  phenomenal  content 

At the same time it is of course misleading to exemplify the aim of our
analytic historiologically in this way. One of our first tasks will be to prove
that if we posit an “I” or subject as that which is proximally given, we shall
completely  miss 
[Bestand]  of  Dasein.
Ontologically,  every  idea  of  a  ‘subject’—unless  refined  by  a  previous
ontological  determination  of  its  basic  character—still  posits  the  subjectum
(ὐποκείμενον)  along  with  it,  no  matter  how  vigorous  one’s  ontical
‘reification  of
protestations  against 
consciousness’.  The  Thinghood  itself  which  such  reification  implies  must
have its ontological origin demonstrated if we are to be in a position to ask
what we are to understand positively when we think of the unreified Being
of the subject, the soul, the consciousness, the spirit, the person. All these
terms  refer  to  definite  phenomenal  domains  which  can  be  ‘given  form’
[“ausformbare”]: but they are never used without a notable failure to see the
need for inquiring about the Being of the entities thus designated. So we are
not  being  terminologically  arbitrary  when  we  avoid  these  terms—or  such
expressions as ‘life’ and ‘man’—in designating those entities which we are
ourselves.

‘soul  substance’  or 

the 

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  understand  it  rightly,  in  any  serious  and
scientifically-minded  ‘philosophy  of  life’  (this  expression  says  about  as
much as “the botany of plants”) there lies an unexpressed tendency towards

an  understanding  of  Dasein’s  Being.  What  is  conspicuous  in  such  a
philosophy (and here it is defective in principle) is that here ‘life’ itself as a
kind of Being does not become ontologically a problem.

H. 47

 

tendency 

in  every 

The  researches  of  Wilhelm  Dilthey  were  stimulated  by  the  perennial
question  of  ‘life’.  Starting  from  ‘life’  itself  as  a  whole,  he  tried  to
understand its ‘Experiences’(1) in their structural and developmental inter-
connections.  His  ‘geisteswissenschaftliche  Psychologie’  is  one  which  no
longer  seeks  to  be  oriented  towards  psychical  elements  and  atoms  or  to
piece the life of the soul together, but aims rather at ‘Gestalten’ and ‘life as
a whole’. Its philosophical relevance, however, is not to be sought here, but
rather in the fact that in all this he was, above all, on  his  way  towards  the
question of ‘life’. To be sure, we can also see here very plainly how limited
were both his problematic and the set of concepts with which it had to be
put into  words.  These  limitations,  however,  are  found  not  only  in  Dilthey
and  Bergson  but  in  all  the  ‘personalistic’  movements  to  which  they  have
given  direction  and 
towards  a  philosophical
anthropology.  The  phenomenological  Interpretation  of  personality  is  in
principle more radical and more transparent; but the question of the Being
of  Dasein  has  a  dimension  which  this  too  fails  to  enter.  No  matter  how
much  Husserl(ii)  and  Scheler  may  differ  in  their  respective  inquiries,  in
their  methods  of  conducting  them,  and  in  their  orientations  towards  the
world as a whole, they are fully in agreement on the negative side of their
Interpretations of personality. The question of ‘personal Being’ itself is one
which they no longer raise. We have chosen Scheler’s Interpretation as an
example,  not  only  because  it  is  accessible  in  print,(iii)  but  because  he
emphasizes  personal  Being  explicitly  as  such,  and  tries  to  determine  its
character by defining the specific Being of acts as contrasted with anything
‘psychical’. For Scheler, the person is never to be thought of as a Thing or a
substance;  the  person  ‘is  rather  the  unity  of  living-through  [Er-lebens]
which  is  immediately  experienced  in  and  with  our  Experiences—not  a
Thing  merely  thought  of  behind  and  outside  what  is  immediately
Experienced’.(iv)  The  person  is  no  Thinglike  and  substantial  Being.  Nor
can the Being of a person be entirely absorbed in being a subject of rational
acts which follow certain laws.

 

 

 

ii. Edmund Husserl’s investigations of the ‘personality’ have not as yet been published. The basic
orientation of his problematic is apparent as early as his paper ‘Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft’,
Logos, vol. I, 1910, p. 319. His investigation was carried much further in the second part of his Ideen
zu einer reinen Phänomenologie  und  phänomenologischen  Philosophie (Husserliana  IV),  of  which
the first part (Cf. this Jahrbuch [Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phänomenologische Forschung—Tr.]
vol.  I,  1913),  presents  the  problematic  of  ‘pure  consciousness’  as  the  basis  for  studying  the
Constitution of any Reality whatsoever. His detailed Constitutional analyses are to be found in three
sections of the second part, where he treats: 1. the Constitution of material Nature; 2. the Constitution
of  animal  Nature;  3.  the  Constitution  of  the  spiritual  world  (the  personalistic  point  of  view  as
opposed to the naturalistic). Husserl begins with the words: ‘Although Dilthey grasped the problems
which point the way, and saw the directions which the work to be done would have to take, he still
failed to penetrate to any decisive formulations of these problems, or to any solutions of them which
are  methodologically  correct.’  Husserl  has  studied  these  problems  still  more  deeply  since  this  first
treatment of them; essential portions of his work have been communicated in his Freiburg lectures.

iii. This Jahrbuch, vol. 1, 2, 1913, and II, 1916; cf. especially pp. 242 ff.
iv. Ibid., II, p. 243.

1. ‘Die “Erlebnisse” dieses “Lebens”...’ The connection between ‘Leben’ (‘life’) and ‘Erlebnisse’
(‘Experiences’) is lost in translation. An ‘Erlebnis’ is not just any ‘experience’ (‘Erfahrung’) but one
which we feel deeply and ‘live through’. We shall translate ‘Erlebnis’ and ‘erleben’ by ‘Experience’
with a capital ‘E’, reserving ‘experience’ for ‘Erfahrung’ and ‘erfahren’.

H. 48

The person is not a Thing, not a substance, not an object. Here Scheler is
emphasizing what Husserl(v) suggests when he insists that the unity of the
person must have a Constitution essentially different from that required for
the  unity  of  Things  of  Nature.(1)  What  Scheler  says  of  the  person,  he
applies to acts as well: ‘But an act is never also an object; for it is essential
to  the  Being  of  acts  that  they  are  Experienced  only  in  their  performance
itself  and  given  in  reflection.”(vi)  Acts  are  something  non-psychical.
Essentially the person exists only in the performance of intentional acts, and
is therefore essentially not an object. Any psychical Objectification of acts,
and hence any way of taking them as something psychical, is tantamount to
depersonalization.  A  person  is  in  any  case  given  as  a  performer  of
intentional acts which are bound together by the unity of a meaning. Thus
psychical Being has nothing to do with personal Being. Acts get performed;
the person is a performer of acts. What, however, is the ontological meaning
of ‘performance’? How is the kind of Being which belongs to a person to be
ascertained ontologically in a positive way? But the critical question cannot
stop  here.  It  must  face  the  Being  of  the  whole  man,  who  is  customarily

taken as a unity of body, soul, and spirit. In their turn “body”, “soul”, and
“spirit”  may  designate  phenomenal  domains  which  can  be  detached  as
themes  for  definite  investigations;  within  certain  limits  their  ontological
indefiniteness may not be important.
 

v. Cf. Logos I, lot. cit.
vi. Ibid., p. 246.

 

1. ‘…wenn er für die Einheit der Person eine wesentlich andere Konstitution fordert als für die

der Naturdinge.’ The second ‘der’ appears in the later editions only.

When,  however,  we  come  to  the  question  of  man’s  Being,  this  is  not
something  we  can  simply  compute(1)  by  adding  together  those  kinds  of
Being  which  body,  soul,  and  spirit  respectively  possess—kinds  of  Being
whose  nature  has  not  as  yet  been  determined.  And  even  if  we  should
attempt such an ontological procedure, some idea of the Being of the whole
must be presupposed. But what stands in the way of the basic question of
Dasein’s  Being  (or  leads  it  off  the  track)  is  an  orientation  thoroughly
coloured by the anthropology of Christianity and the ancient world, whose
inadequate  ontological  foundations  have  been  overlooked  both  by  the
philosophy of life and by personalism. There are two important elements in
this traditional anthropology:
 

1. Reading ‘errechnet’. The earliest editions have ‘verrechnet’, with the correct reading provided

in a list of errata.

1. ‘Man’ is here defined as a ζῷον λόγον ἔχον, and this is Interpreted to
mean an animal rationale, something living which has reason. But the kind
of Being which belongs to a ζῷον  is  understood in  the  sense  of occurring
and  Being-present-at-hand.  The  λόγος  is  some  superior  endowment;  the
kind of Being which belongs to it, however, remains quite as obscure as that
of the entire entity thus compounded.

H. 49

 

2.  The  second  clue  for  determining  the  nature  of  man’s  Being  and
essence  is  a  theological  one:  καὶ  εἶπεν  ὁ  Θεός·  ποιήσωμεν  ἄνθρωπον
κατ᾿  εἰκόνα  ἡμετέραν  καὶ  καθ᾿  ὁμοίωσιν—“faciamus  hominem  ad

imaginem nostram et similitudinem”.(vii) With this as its point of departure,
the anthropology of Christian theology, taking with it the ancient definition,
arrives at an interpretation of that entity which we call “man”. But just as
the  Being  of  God  gets  Interpreted  ontologically  by  means  of  the  ancient
ontology,  so  does  the  Being  of  the  ens  finitum,  and  to  an  even  greater
extent.  In  modern  times  the  Christian  definition  has  been  deprived  of  its
theological  character.  But  the  idea  of  ‘transcendence’—that  man  is
something  that  reaches  beyond  himself—is  rooted  in  Christian  dogmatics,
which  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  made  an  ontological  problem  of  man’s
Being. The idea of transcendence, according to which man is more than a
mere  something  endowed  with  intelligence,  has  worked  itself  out  with
different variations. The following quotations will illustrate how these have
originated:  ‘His  praeclaris  dotibus  excelluit  prima  hominis  conditio,  ut
ratio,  intelligentia,  prudentia,  judicium  non  modo  ad  terrenae  vitae
gubernationem suppeterent, sed quibus  t r a n s c e n d e r e t   usque ad
Deum et aeternam felicitatem.’(viii) ‘Denn dass der mensch sin  u f s e h e n
  hat  uf  Gott  und  sin  wort,  zeigt  er  klarlich  an,  dass  er  nach  siner  natur
etwas Gott näher anerborn, etwas mee  n a c h s c h l ä g t, etwas  z u z u g s
z u  jm hat, das alles on zwyfel darus flüsst, dass er nach dem  b i l d n u s
 Gottes geschaffen ist’.(ix)

The two sources which are relevant for the traditional anthropology—the
Greek  definition  and  the  clue  which  theology  has  provided—indicate  that
over and above the attempt to determine the essence of ‘man’ as an entity,
the  question  of  his  Being  has  remained  forgotten,  and  that  this  Being  is
rather conceived as something obvious or ‘self-evident’ in the sense of the
Being-present-at-hand  of  other  created  Things.  These  two  clues  become
intertwined  in  the  anthropology  of  modern  times,  where  the  res  cogitans,
consciousness, and the interconnectedness of Experience serve as the point
of departure for methodical study. But since even the cogitationes are either
left ontologically undetermined, or get tacitly assumed as something ‘self-
evidently’  ‘given’  whose  ‘Being’  is  not  to  be  questioned,  the  decisive
ontological 
remain
undetermined.
 

anthropological  problematics 

foundations 

of 

vii. Genesis I, 26. [‘And God said, “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.” ’—Tr.]
viii. Calvin,  Institutio  I,  XV,  Section  8.  [‘Man’s  first  condition  was  excellent  because  of  these
outstanding  endowments:  that  reason,  intelligence,  prudence,  judgment  should  suffice  not  only  for

the government of this earthly life, but that by them he might ascend beyond, even unto God and to
eternal felicity.’—Tr.]

ix. Zwingli. Von der Klarheit des Wortes Gottes (Deutsche Schriften I, 56). [‘Because man looks
up to God and his Word, he indicates clearly that in his very Nature he is born somewhat closer to
God, is something more after his stamp, that he has something that draws him to God—all this comes
beyond a doubt from his having been created in God’s image.’—Tr.]

H. 50

 

This  is  no  less  true  of  ‘psychology’, whose  anthropological  tendencies
are  today  unmistakable.  Nor  can  we  compensate  for  the  absence  of
ontological  foundations  by  taking  anthropology  and  psychology  and
building them into the framework of a general biology. In the  order  which
any  possible  comprehension  and  interpretation  must  follow,  biology  as  a
‘science  of  life’  is  founded  upon  the  ontology  of  Dasein,  even  if  not
entirely.  Life,  in  its  own  right,  is  a  kind  of  Being;  but  essentially  it  is
accessible only in Dasein. The ontology of life is accomplished by way of a
privative Interpretation; it determines what must be the case if there can be
anything  like  mere-aliveness  [Nur-noch-leben].  Life  is  not  a  mere  Being-
present-at-hand,  nor  is  it  Dasein.  In  turn,  Dasein  is  never  to  be  defined
ontologically by regarding it as life (in an ontologically indefinite manner)
plus something else.

In suggesting that anthropology, psychology, and biology all fail to give
an unequivocal and ontologically adequate answer to the question about the
kind  of  Being which  belongs  to  those  entities  which  we  ourselves  are,  we
are not passing judgment on the positive work of these disciplines. We must
always bear in mind, however, that these ontological foundations can never
be disclosed by subsequent hypotheses derived from empirical material, but
that  they  are  always  ‘there’  already,  even  when  that  empirical  material
simply gets collected. If positive research fails to see these foundations and
holds  them  to  be  self-evident,  this  by  no  means  proves  that  they  are  not
basic or that they are not problematic in a more radical sense than any thesis
of positive science can ever be.(x)
 

x. But to disclose the a priori is not to make an ‘a-prioristic’ construction. Edmund Husserl has
not only enabled us to understand once more the meaning of any genuine philosophical empiricism;
he  has also  given us the necessary tools. ‘A-priorism’ is  the  method  of  every  scientific  philosophy
which understands itself. There is nothing constructivistic about it. But for this very reason a priori
research requires that the phenomenal basis be properly prepared. The horizon which is closest to us,
and which must be made ready for the analytic of Dasein, lies in its average everydayness.

11.  The  Existential  Analytic  and  the  Interpretation  of  Primitive
Dasein.  The  Difficulties  of  Achieving  a  ‘Natural  Conception  of  the
World’
 

H. 51

 

through 

The  Interpretation  of  Dasein  in  its  everydayness,  however,  is  not
identical with the describing of some primitive stage of Dasein with which
we  can  become  acquainted  empirically 
the  medium  of
anthropology:  Everydayness  does  not  coincide  with  primitiveness,  but  is
rather  a  mode  of  Dasein’s  Being,  even  when  that  Dasein  is  active  in  a
highly developed and differentiated culture—and precisely then. Moreover,
even  primitive  Dasein  has  possibilities  of  a  Being  which  is  not  of  the
everyday kind, and it has a specific everydayness of its own. To  orient  the
analysis of Dasein towards the ‘life of primitive peoples’ can have positive
significance  [Bedeutung]  as  a  method  because  ‘primitive  phenomena’  are
often  less  concealed  and  less  complicated  by  extensive  self-interpretation
on  the  part  of  the  Dasein  in  question.  Primitive  Dasein  often  speaks  to  us
more directly in terms of a primordial absorption in ‘phenomena’ (taken in
a  pre-phenomenological  sense).  A  way  of  conceiving  things  which  seems,
perhaps,  rather  clumsy  and  crude  from  our  standpoint,  can  be  positively
helpful in bringing out the ontological structures of phenomena in a genuine
way.

But  heretofore  our  information  about  primitives  has  been  provided  by
ethnology.  And  ethnology  operates  with  definite  preliminary  conceptions
and interpretations of human Dasein in general, even in first ‘receiving’ its
material,  and  in  sifting  it  and  working  it  up.  Whether  the  everyday
psychology  or  even  the  scientific  psychology  and  sociology  which  the
ethnologist brings with him can provide any scientific assurance that we can
have  proper  access  to  the  phenomena  we  are  studying,  and  can  interpret
them and transmit them in the right way, has not yet been established. Here
too  we  are  confronted  with  the  same  state  of  affairs  as  in  the  other
disciplines  we  have  discussed.  Ethnology  itself  already  presupposes  as  its
clue  an  inadequate  analytic  of  Dasein.  But  since  the  positive  sciences
neither ‘can’ nor should wait for the ontological labours of philosophy to be
done, the further course of research will not take the form of an ‘advance’

but will be accomplished by recapitulating what has already been ontically
discovered,  and  by  purifying  it  in  a  way  which  is  ontologically  more
transparent.(xi)
 

xi. Ernst Cassirer has recently made the Dasein of myth a theme for philosophical Interpretation.
(See his Philosophie der symbolischen Formen, vol. II, Das mythische Denken, 1925.) In this study,
clues of far-reaching importance are made available for ethnological research. From the standpoint of
philosophical problematics it remains an open question whether the foundations of this Interpretation
are  sufficiently  transparent—whether  in  particular  the  architectonics  and  the  general  systematic
content of Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason can provide a possible design for such a task, or whether a
new and more primordial approach may not here be needed. That Cassirer himself sees the possibility
of such a task is shown by his note on pp. 16 ff., where he alludes to the phenomenological horizons
disclosed  by  Husserl.  In  a  discussion  between  the  author  and  Cassirer  on  the  occasion  of  a  lecture
before the Hamburg  section of the Kantgesellschaft in  December  1923  on  ‘Tasks  and  Pathways  of
Phenomenological  Research’,  it  was  already  apparent  that  we  agreed  in  demanding  an  existential
analytic such as was sketched in that lecture.

H. 52

 

No  matter  how  easy  it  may  be  to  show  how  ontological  problematics
differ  formally  from  ontical  research  there  are  still  difficulties  in  carrying
out an existential analytic, especially in making a start. This task includes a
desideratum  which  philosophy  has 
long  found  disturbing  but  has
continually refused to achieve: to work out the idea of a ‘natural conception
of  the  world’. The  rich  store  of  information  now  available  as  to  the  most
exotic and manifold cultures and forms of Dasein seems favourable to our
setting about this task in a fruitful way. But this is merely a semblance. At
bottom this plethora of information can seduce us into failing to recognize
the real problem. We shall not get a genuine knowledge of essences simply
by  the  syncretistic  activity  of  universal  comparison  and  classification.
Subjecting  the  manifold  to  tabulation  does  not  ensure  any  actual
understanding of what lies there before us as thus set in order. If an ordering
principle is genuine, it has its own content as a thing [Sachgehalt], which is
never to be found by means of such ordering, but is already presupposed in
it. So if one is to put various pictures of the world in order, one must have
an explicit idea of the world as such. And if the ‘world’ itself is something
constitutive  for  Dasein,  one  must  have  an  insight  into  Dasein’s  basic
structures in order to treat the world-phenomenon conceptually.

In this chapter we have characterized some things positively and taken a
negative  stand  with  regard  to  others;  in  both  cases  our  goal  has  been  to

promote  a  correct  understanding  of  the  tendency  which  underlies  the
following Interpretation and the kind of questions which it poses. Ontology
can contribute only indirectly towards advancing the positive disciplines as
we find them today. It has a goal of its own, if indeed, beyond the acquiring
of  information  about  entities,  the  question  of  Being  is  the  spur  for  all
scientific seeking.

II: BEING-IN-THE-WORLD IN GENERAL AS THE BASIC

STATE OF DASEIN

 

 

12.  A  Preliminary  Sketch  of  Being-in-the-World,  in  terms  of  an

Orientation towards Being-in as such
 

H. 53

IN  our  preparatory  discussions  (Section  9)  we  have  brought  out  some
characteristics  of  Being  which  will  provide  us  with  a  steady  light  for  our
further  investigation,  but  which  will  at  the  same  time  become  structurally
concrete  as  that  investigation  continues.  Dasein  is  an  entity  which,  in  its
very  Being,  comports  itself  understandingly  towards  that  Being.  In  saying
this,  we  are  calling  attention  to  the  formal  concept  of  existence.  Dasein
exists.  Furthermore,  Dasein  is  an  entity  which  in  each  case  I  myself  am.
Mineness belongs to any existent Dasein, and belongs to it as the condition
which makes authenticity  and inauthenticity possible.  In each case  Dasein
exists  in  one  or  the  other  of  these  two  modes,  or  else  it  is  modally
undifferentiated.(1)
 

1.  ‘Zum  existierenden  Dasein  gehört  die  Jemeinigkeit  als  Bedingung  der  Möglichkeit  von
Eigentlichkeit  und  Uneigentlichkeit.  Dasein  existiert  je  in  einem  dieser  Modi,  bzw.  in  der  modalen
Indifferenz ihrer.’

But  these  are  both  ways  in  which  Dasein’s  Being  takes  on  a  definite
character, and they must be seen and understood a priori as grounded upon
that  state  of  Being  which  we  have  called  “Being-in-the-world’.  An
interpretation  of  this  constitutive  state  is  needed  if  we  are  to  set  up  our
analytic of Dasein correctly.

The  compound  expression  ‘Being-in-the-world’  indicates  in  the  very
way  we  have  coined  it,  that  it  stands  for  a  unitary  phenomenon.  This
primary  datum  must  be  seen  as  a  whole.  But  while  Being-in-the-world

cannot be broken up into contents which may be pieced together, this does
not prevent it from having several constitutive items in its structure. Indeed
the phenomenal datum which our expression indicates is one which may, in
fact,  be  looked  at  in  three  ways.  If  we  study  it,  keeping  the  whole
phenomenon  firmly  in  mind  beforehand,  the  following  items  may  be
brought out for emphasis:

First,  the  ‘in-the-world’.  With  regard  to  this  there  arises  the  task  of
inquiring into the ontological structure of the ‘world’ and defining the idea
of worldhood as such. (See the third chapter of this Division.)

Second,  that  entity  which  in  every  case  has  Being-in-the-world  as  the
way in which it is. Here we are seeking that which one inquires into when
one asks the question ‘Who?’ By a phenomenological demonstration(1) we
shall determine who is in the mode of Dasein’s average everydayness. (See
the fourth chapter of this Division.)

Third,  Being-in  [In-sein]  as  such.  We  must  set  forth  the  ontological
Constitution  of  inhood  [Inheit]  itself.  (See  the  fifth  chapter  of  this
Division.). Emphasis upon any one of these constitutive items signifies that
the others are emphasized along with it; this means that in any such case the
whole  phenomenon  gets  seen.  Of  course  Being-in-the-world  is  a  state  of
Dasein(2)  which  is  necessary  a  priori,  but  it  is  far  from  sufficient  for
completely  determining  Dasein’s  Being.  Before  making  these  three
phenomena  the  themes  for  special  analyses,  we  shall  attempt  by  way  of
orientation to characterize the third of these factors.
 

1.  Here  we  follow  the  older  editions  in  reading,  ‘Ausweisung’.  The  newer  editions  have

2. ‘…Verfassung des Daseins...’ The earliest editions read ‘Wesens’ instead ‘Daseins’. Correction

‘Aufweisung’ (‘exhibition’).

is made in a list of errata.

H. 54

 

What is meant by “Being-in”? Our proximal reaction is to round out this
expression to “Being-in ‘in the world’ ”, and we are inclined to understand
this  Being-in  as  ‘Being  in  something’  [“Sein  in...”].  This  latter  term
designates the kind of Being which an entity has when it is ‘in’ another one,
as  the  water  is  ‘in’  the  glass,  or  the  garment  is  ‘in’  the  cupboard.  By  this
‘in’  we  mean  the  relationship  of  Being  which  two  entities  extended  ‘in’
space  have  to  each  other  with  regard  to  their  location  in  that  space.  Both

water  and  glass,  garment  and  cupboard,  are  ‘in’  space  and  ‘at’  a  location,
and both in the same way. This relationship of Being can be expanded: for
instance,  the  bench  is  in  the  lecture-room,  the  lecture-room  is  in  the
university, the university is in the city, and so on, until we can say that the
bench  is  ‘in  world-space’.  All  entities  whose  Being  ‘in’  one  another  can
thus  be  described  have  the  same  kind  of  Being—that  of  Being-present-at-
hand—as  Things  occurring  ‘within’  the  world.  Being-present-at-hand  ‘in’
something  which  is  likewise  present-at-hand,  and  Being-present-at-hand-
along-with  [Mitvorhandensein]  in  the  sense  of  a  definite  location-
relationship  with  something  else  which  has  the  same  kind  of  Being,  are
ontological  characteristics  which  we  call  “categorial”: they  are  of  such  a
sort as to belong to entities whose kind of Being is not of the character of
Dasein.

Being-in, on the other hand, is a state of Dasein’s Being; it is an  e x i s t
e n t i a l e. So one cannot think of it as the Being-present-at-hand of some
corporeal Thing (such as a human body) ‘in’ an entity which is present-at-
hand. Nor does the term “Being-in” mean a spatial ‘in-one-another-ness’ of
things present-at-hand, any more than the word ‘in’ primordially signifies a
spatial  relationship  of  this  kind.(i)  ‘In’  is  derived  from  “innan”—“to
reside”,(1)  “habitare”,  “to  dwell”  [sich  auf  halten].  ‘An’  signifies  “I  am
accustomed”,  “I  am  familiar  with”,  “I  look  after  something”.(2)  It  has  the
signification of “colo” in the senses of “habito” and “diligo”. The entity to
which  Being-in  in  this  signification  belongs  is  one  which  we  have
characterized  as  that  entity  which  in  each  case  I  myself  am  [bin].  The
expression ‘bin’ is connected with ‘bei’, and so ‘ich bin’ [‘I am’] means in
its turn “I reside” or “dwell alongside” the world, as that which is familiar
to me in such and such a way.(3) “Being” [Sein], as the definition of ‘ich
bin’  (that  is  to  say,  when  it  is  understood  as  an  existentiale), signifies  “to
reside alongside...”, “to  be familiar with...”. “Being-in”  is  thus  the  formal
existential  expression  for  the  Being  of  Dasein,  which  has  Being-in-the-
world as its essential state.

H. 55

 

‘Being  alongside’  the  world  in  the  sense  of  being  absorbed  in  the
world(4) (a sense which calls for still closer interpretation) is an existentiale
founded  upon  Being-in.  In  these  analyses  the  issue  is  one  of  seeing  a

primordial  structure  of  Dasein’s  Being—a  structure  in  accordance  with
whose  phenomenal  content  the  concepts  of  Being  must  be  Articulated;
because of this, and because this structure is in principle one which cannot
be grasped by the traditional ontological categories, this ‘Being-alongside’
must be examined still more closely. We shall again choose the method of
contrasting  it  with  a  relationship  of  Being  which  is  essentially  different
ontologically—viz. categorial—but which we express by the same linguistic
means.  Fundamental  ontological  distinctions  are  easily  obliterated;  and  if
they  are  to  be  envisaged  phenomenally  in  this  way,  this  must  be  done
explicitly,  even  at  the  risk  of  discussing  the  ‘obvious’.  The  status  of  the
ontological  analytic  shows,  however,  that  we  have  been  far  from
interpreting  these  obvious  matters  with  an  adequate  ‘grasp’,  still  less  with
regard  for  the  meaning  of  their  Being;  and  we  are  even  farther  from
possessing a stable coinage for the appropriate structural concepts.
 

i. Cf. Jakob Grimm, Kleinere Schriften, vol. VII, p. 247.

 

1. Reading ‘innan—wohnen’. As Heidegger points out in his footnote, this puzzling passage has
its source in Grimm’s Kleinere Schriften, Vol. VII, pp. 247 ff., where we find two short articles, the
first entitled ‘IN’ and the second ‘IN UND BEI’. The first article begins by comparing a number of
archaic  German  words  meaning  ‘domus’,  all  having  a  form  similar  to  our  English  ‘inn’,  which
Grimm  mentions.  He  goes  on  to  postulate  ‘a  strong  verb  “innan”,  which  must  have  meant  either
“habitare”, “domi esse”, or “recipere in domum” ’ (though  only a weak derivative form ‘innian’ is
actually found), with a surviving strong preterite written either as ‘an’ or as ‘ann’. Grimm goes on to
argue that the preposition ‘in’ is derived from the verb, rather than the verb from the preposition.

2. ‘…“an” bedeutet: ich bin gewohnt, vertraut mit, ich pflege etwas...’
In Grimm’s second article he adds: ‘there was also an anomalous “ann” with the plural “unnum”,
which expressed “amo”, “diligo”, “faveo”, and to which our “gönnen” and “Gunst” are immediately
related, as has long been recognized. “Ann” really means “ich bin eingewohnt”, “pflege zu bauen”;
this conceptual transition may be shown with minimal complication in the Latin “colo”, which stands
for “habito” as well as “diligo”.’

It  is  not  entirely  clear  whether  Heidegger’s  discussion  of  ‘an’  is  aimed  to  elucidate  the
preposition ‘an’ (which corresponds in some of its usages to the English ‘at’, and which he has just
used in remarking that the water and the glass are both at a location), or rather to explain the preterite
‘an’ of ‘innan’.

The reader should note that while the verb ‘wohnen’ normally means ‘to reside’ or ‘to dwell’, the
expression ‘ich bin gewohnt’ means ‘I am accustomed to’, and ‘ich bin eingewohnt’ means ‘I have
become accustomed to the place where I reside—to my surroundings’. Similarly ‘ich pflege etwas’
may mean either ‘I am accustomed to do something’ or ‘I take care of something’ or ‘I devote myself
to  it’.  (Grimm’s  ‘pflege  zu  bauen’  presumably  means  ‘I  am  accustomed  to  putting  my  trust  in
something’,  ‘I  can  build  on  it’.)  The  Latin,  ‘colo’  has  the  parallel  meanings  of  ‘I  take  care  of
something’ or ‘cherish’ it (‘diligo’) and ‘I dwell’ or ‘I inhabit’ (‘habito’).

3.  ‘...ich  wohne, halte  mich  auf bei... der Welt,  als  dem so und so Vertrauten.’ The  preposition
‘bei’, like ‘an’, does not have quite the semantical range of any English preposition. Our ‘alongside’,
with  which  we  shall  translate  it  when  other  devices  seem  less  satisfactory,  especially  in  the  phrase

‘Being alongside’ (‘Sein bei’), is often quite misleading; the sense here is closer to that of ‘at’ in such
expressions  as  ‘at  home’  or  ‘at  my  father’s’,  or  that  of  the  French  ‘chez’.  Here  again  Heidegger
seems to be relying upon Grimm, who proceeds (loc. cit.) to connect ‘bei’ with ‘bauen’ (‘build’) and
‘bin’.

4. ‘…in dem... Sinne des Aufgehens in der Welt...’ ‘Aufgehen’ means literally ‘to go up’, or ‘to
rise’ in the sense that the sun ‘rises’ or the dough ‘rises’. But when followed by the preposition ‘in’,
it  takes  on  other  meanings.  Thus  5  ‘geht  auf’  into  30  in  the  sense  that  it  ‘goes  into’  30  without
remainder; a country ‘geht auf’ into another country into which it is taken over or absorbed; a person
‘geht auf’ in anything to which he devotes himself fully, whether an activity or another person. We
shall usually translate ‘aufgehen’ by some form of ‘absorb’.

As  an  existentiale,  ‘Being  alongside’  the  world  never  means  anything
like  the  Being-present-at-hand-together  of  Things  that  occur.  There  is  no
such  thing  as  the  ‘side-by-side-ness’  of  an  entity  called  ‘Dasein’  with
another  entity  called  ‘world’.  Of  course  when  two  things  are  present-at-
hand together alongside one another,(1) we are accustomed to express this
occasionally by something like ‘The table stands “by” [“bei”] the door’ or
‘The  chair  “touches”  [“berührt”]  the  wall’.  Taken  strictly,  ‘touching’  is
never  what  we  are  talking  about  in  such  cases,  not  because  accurate
reexamination will always eventually establish that there is a space between
the chair and the wall, but because in principle the chair can never touch the
wall, even if the space between them should be equal to zero. If the chair
could touch the wall, this would presuppose that the wall is the sort of thing
‘for’  which  a  chair  would  be  encounterable.(2) An  entity  present-at-hand
within the world can be touched by another entity only if by its very nature
the  latter  entity  has  Being-in  as  its  own  kind  of  Being—only  if,  with  its
Being-there [Da-sein], something like the world is already revealed to it, so
that  from  out  of  that  world  another  entity  can  manifest  itself  in  touching,
and thus become accessible in its Being-present-at-hand. When two entities
are  present-at-hand  within  the  world,  and  furthermore  are  worldless  in
themselves, they can never ‘touch’ each other, nor can either of them ‘be’
‘alongside’ the  other.  The  clause  ‘furthermore  are  worldless’  must  not  be
left  out;  for  even  entities  which  are  not  worldless—Dasein  itself,  for
example—are  present-at-hand  ‘in’  the  world,  or,  more  exactly,  can  with
some right and within certain limits be taken as merely present-at-hand. To
do this, one must completely disregard or just not see the existential state of
Being-in.  But  the  fact  that  ‘Dasein’  can  be  taken  as  something  which  is
present-at-hand  and  just  present-at-hand,  is  not  to  be  confused  with  a
certain way of ‘presence-at-hand’ which is Dasein’s own. This latter kind of

presence-at-hand becomes accessible not by disregarding Dasein’s specific
structures but only by understanding them in advance.
 

1. ‘Das Beisammen zweier Vorhandener…’
2. ‘Voraussetzung dafür wäre, dass die Wand “für” den Stuhl begegnen könnte.’ (Cf. also H. 97

below.)

H. 56

 

Dasein understands its ownmost Being in the sense of a certain ‘factual
Being-present-at-hand’.(ii) And yet the ‘factuality’ of the fact [Tatsache] of
one’s own Dasein is at bottom quite different ontologically from the factual
occurrence of some kind of mineral, for example. Whenever Dasein is, it is
as  a  Fact;  and  the  factuality  of  such  a  Fact  is  what  we  shall  call  Dasein’s
“facticity”.(1) This  is  a  definite  way  of  Being  [Seinsbestimmtheit],  and  it
has  a  complicated  structure  which  cannot  even  be  grasped  as  a  problem
until Dasein’s basic existential states have been worked out. The concept of
“facticity” implies that an entity ‘within-the-world’ has Being-in-the-world
in such a way that it can understand itself as bound up in its ‘destiny’ with
the Being of those entities which it encounters within its own world.

In the first instance it is enough to see the ontological difference between
Being-in as an existentiale and the category of the ‘insideness’ which things
present-at-hand  can  have  with  regard  to  one  another.  By  thus  delimiting
Being-in,  we  are  not  denying  every  kind  of  ‘spatiality’  to  Dasein.  On  the
contrary, Dasein itself has a ‘Being-in-space’ of its own; but this in turn is
possible only on the basis of Being-in-the-world in general. Hence Being-in
is not to be explained ontologically by some ontical characterization, as if
one were to say, for instance, that Being-in in a world is a spiritual property,
and  that  man’s  ‘spatiality’  is  a  result  of  his  bodily  nature  (which,  at  the
same  time,  always  gets  ‘founded’  upon  corporeality).  Here  again  we  are
faced with the Being-present-at-hand-together of some such spiritual Thing
along  with  a  corporeal  Thing,  while  the  Being  of  the  entity  thus
compounded  remains  more  obscure  than  ever.  Not  until  we  understand
Being-in-the-world  as  an  essential  structure  of  Dasein  can  we  have  any
insight into Dasein’s existential spatiality. Such an insight will keep us from
failing  to  see  this  structure  or  from  previously  cancelling  it  out—a
procedure  motivated  not  ontologically  but  rather  ‘metaphysically’  by  the

naïve supposition that man is, in the first instance, a spiritual Thing which
subsequently gets misplaced ‘into’ a space.
 

ii. Cf. Section 29.

1.  ‘Die  Tatsächlichkeit  des  Faktums  Dasein,  als  welches  jeweilig  jedes  Dasein  ist,  nennen  wir
seine  Faktizität.’  We  shall  as  a  rule  translate  ‘Tatsächlichkeit’  as  ‘factuality’,  and  ‘Faktizität’  as
‘facticity’, following our conventions for ‘tatsächlich’ and ‘faktisch’. (See note 2, H. 7 above.) The
present  passage  suggests  a  comparable  distinction  between  the  nouns  ‘Tatsache’  and  ‘Faktum’;  so
while we find many passages where these seem to be used interchangeably, we translate ‘Faktum’ as
‘Fact’ with an initial capital, using ‘fact’ for ‘Tatsache’ and various other expressions. On ‘factuality’
and ‘facticity’ see also H. 135 below.

 

 

H. 57

it  go,  undertaking,  accomplishing,  evincing, 

Dasein’s  facticity  is  such  that  its  Being-in-the-world  has  always
dispersed  [zerstreut]  itself  or  even  split  itself  up  into  definite  ways  of
Being-in. The multiplicity of these is indicated by the following examples:
having to do with something, producing something, attending to something
and  looking  after  it,  making  use  of  something,  giving  something  up  and
letting 
interrogating,
considering,  discussing,  determining...  All  these  ways  of  Being-in  have
concern(1) as their kind of Being—a kind of Being which we have yet to
characterize in detail. Leaving undone, neglecting, renouncing, taking a rest
—these too are ways of concern; but these are all deficient modes, in which
the  possibilities  of  concern  are  kept  to  a  ‘bare  minimum’.(2)  The  term
‘concern’  has,  in  the  first  instance,  its  colloquial  [vorwissenschaftliche]
signification,  and  can  mean  to  carry  out  something,  to  get  it  done
[erledigen], to ‘straighten it out’. It can also mean to ‘provide oneself with
something’.(3)  We  use  the  expression  with  still  another  characteristic  turn
of  phrase  when  we  say  “I  am  concerned  for  the  success  of  the
undertaking.”(4)
 

1. ‘Besorgen’. As  Heidegger  points  out,  he  will  use  this  term  in  a  special  sense  which  is  to  be
distinguished from many of its customary usages. We shall, as a rule, translate it by ‘concern’, though
this  is  by  no  means  an  exact  equivalent.  The  English  word  ‘concern’  is  used  in  many  expressions
where  ‘Besorgen’  would  be  inappropriate  in  German,  such  as  ‘This  concerns  you’,  ‘That  is  my
concern’, ‘He has an interest in several banking concerns’. ‘Besorgen’ stands rather for the kind of
‘concern’  in  which  we  ‘concern  ourselves’  with  activities  which  we  perform  or  things  which  we
procure.

2. ‘…alle Modi des “Nur noch” in bezug auf Möglichkeiten des Besorgens.’ The point is that in

these cases concern is just barely (‘nur noch’) involved.

3. ‘…sich etwas besorgen im Sinne von “sich etwas verschaffen”.’
4.  ‘…ich  besorge,  dass  das  Unternehmen  misslingt.’  Here  it  is  not  difficult  to  find  a
corresponding usage of ‘concern’, as our version suggests. But the analogy is imperfect. While we
can  say  that  we  are  ‘concerned  for  the  success  of  the  enterprise’  or  ‘concerned  lest  the  enterprise
should  fail,’  we  would  hardly  follow  the  German  to  the  extent  of  expressing  ‘concern  that’  the
enterprise  should  fail;  nor  would  the  German  express  ‘Besorgen’  at  discovering  that  the  enterprise
has failed already.

Here  ‘concern’  means  something  like  apprehensiveness.  In  contrast  to
these colloquial ontical significations, the expression ‘concern’ will be used
in  this  investigation  as  an  ontological  term  for  an  existentiale,  and  will
designate the Being of a possible way of Being-in-the-world. This term has
been  chosen  not  because  Dasein  happens  to  be  proximally  and  to  a  large
extent ‘practical’ and economic, but because the Being of Dasein itself is to
be  made  visible  as  care.(1)  This  expression  too  is  to  be  taken  as  an
ontological  structural  concept.  (See  Chapter  6  of  this  Division.)  It  has
nothing to do with ‘tribulation’, ‘melancholy’, or the ‘cares of life’, though
ontically  one  can  come  across  these  in  every  Dasein.  These—like  their
opposites,  ‘gaiety’  and  ‘freedom  from  care’—are  ontically  possible  only
because Dasein, when understood ontologically, is care. Because Being-in-
the-world belongs essentially to Dasein, its Being towards the world [Sein
zur Welt] is essentially concern.

From  what  we  have  been  saying,  it  follows  that  Being-in  is  not  a
‘property’ which Dasein sometimes has and sometimes does not have, and
without which it could be just as well as it could with it. It is not the case
that  man  ‘is’  and  then  has,  by  way  of  an  extra,  a  relationship-of-Being
towards the ‘world’—a world with which he provides himself occasionally.
(2) Dasein is never ‘proximally’ an entity which is, so to speak, free from
Being-in,  but  which  sometimes  has  the  inclination  to  take  up  a
‘relationship’ towards the world. Taking up relationships towards the world
is possible only because Dasein, as Being-in-the-world, is as it is. This state
of  Being  does  not  arise  just  because  some  other  entity  is  present-at-hand
outside of Dasein and meets up with it. Such an entity can ‘meet up with’
Dasein only in so far as it can, of its own accord, show itself within a world.
 

1. ‘Sorge’. The important etymological connection between ‘Besorgen’ (‘concern’) and ‘Sorge’

(‘care’) is lost in our translation. On ‘Sorge’ see especially Sections 41 and 42 below.

2.  ‘Der  Mensch  “ist”  nicht  und  hat  überdies  noch  ein  Seinsverhältnis  zur  “Welt”,  die  er  sich

gelegentlich zulegt.’

H. 58

 

Nowadays  there  is  much  talk  about  ‘man’s  having  an  environment
[Umwelt]’;  but  this  says  nothing  ontologically  as  long  as  this  ‘having’  is
left  indefinite.  In  its  very  possibility  this  ‘having’  is  founded  upon  the
existential  state  of  Being-in.  Because  Dasein  is  essentially  an  entity  with
Being-in,  it  can  explicitly  discover  those  entities  which  it  encounters
environmentally, it can know them, it can avail  itself of them, it can have
the ‘world’. To talk about ‘having an environment’ is ontically trivial, but
ontologically  it  presents  a  problem.  To  solve  it  requires  nothing  else  than
defining the Being of Dasein, and doing so in a way which is ontologically
adequate.  Although  this  state  of  Being  is  one  of  which  use  has  made  in
biology,  especially  since  K.  von  Baer,  one  must  not  conclude  that  its
philosophical  use  implies  ‘biologism’.  For  the  environment  is  a  structure
which  even  biology  as  a  positive  science  can  never  find  and  can  never
define, but must presuppose and constantly employ. Yet, even as an a priori
condition  for  the  objects  which  biology  takes  for  its  theme,  this  structure
itself  can  be  explained  philosophically  only  if  it  has  been  conceived
beforehand as a structure of Dasein. Only in terms of an orientation towards
the  ontological  structure  thus  conceived  can  ‘life’  as  a  state  of  Being  be
defined a priori, and this must be done in a privative manner.(1) Ontically
as  well  as  ontologically,  the  priority  belongs  to  Being-in-the  world  as
concern.  In  the  analytic  of  Dasein  this  structure  undergoes  a  basic
Interpretation.
 

1. ‘…auf dem Wege der Privation...’ The point is that in order to understand life merely as such,

we must make abstraction from the fuller life of Dasein. See H. 50 above.

But  have  we  not  confined  ourselves  to  negative  assertions  in  all  our
attempts to determine the nature of this state of Being? Though this Being-
in  is  supposedly so fundamental,  we  always keep hearing about  what it is
not. Yes indeed. But there is nothing accidental about our characterizing it
predominantly  in  so  negative  a  manner.  In  doing  so  we  have  rather  made
known  what  is  peculiar  to  this  phenomenon,  and  our  characterization  is
therefore  positive  in  a  genuine  sense—a  sense  appropriate  to  the

is 

itself.  When 

Being-in-the-world 

exhibited
phenomenon 
phenomenologically,  disguises  and  concealments  are  rejected  because this
phenomenon itself always gets ‘seen’ in a certain way in every Dasein. And
it thus gets ‘seen’ because it makes up a basic state of Dasein, and in every
case is already disclosed for Dasein’s understanding of Being, and disclosed
along  with  that  Being  itself.  But  for  the  most  part  this  phenomenon  has
been  explained  in  a  way  which  is  basically  wrong,  or  interpreted  in  an
ontologically inadequate manner. On the other hand, this ‘seeing in a certain
way  and  yet  for  the  most  part  wrongly  explaining’  is  itself  based  upon
nothing  else  than  this  very  state  of  Dasein’s  Being,  which  is  such  that
Dasein  itself—and  this  means  also  its  Being-in-the  world—gets  its
ontological  understanding  of  itself  in  the  first  instance  from  those  entities
which it itself is not but which it encounters ‘within’ its world, and from the
Being which they possess.

H. 59

 

Both  i n  Dasein and  f o r  it, this state of Being is always in some way
familiar  [bekannt].  Now  if  it  is  also  to  become  known  [erkannt],  the
knowing which such a task explicitly implies  takes itself  (as  a knowing of
the  world  [Welterkennen])  as  the  chief  exemplification  of  the  ‘soul’s’
relationship to the world. Knowing the world (νοεῖν)—or rather addressing
oneself  to  the  ‘world’  and  discussing  it  (λόγος)—thus  functions  as  the
primary mode of Being-in-the-world, even though Being-in-the-world does
not  as  such  get  conceived.  But  because  this  structure  of  Being  remains
ontologically  inaccessible,  yet  is  experienced  ontically  as  a  ‘relationship’
between  one  entity  (the  world)  and  another  (the  soul),  and  because  one
proximally understands Being by taking entities as entities within-the-world
for  one’s  ontological  foothold,  one  tries  to  conceive  the  relationship
between world and soul as grounded in these two entities themselves and in
the  meaning  of  their  Being—namely,  to  conceive  it  as  Being-present-at-
hand. And even though Being-in-the-world is something of which one has
pre-phenomenological experience and acquaintance [erfahren und gekannt],
it  becomes  invisible  if  one  interprets  it  in  a  way  which  is  ontologically
inappropriate.  This  state  of  Dasein’s  Being  is  now  one  with  which  one  is
just barely acquainted (and indeed as something obvious), with the stamp of
an  inappropriate  interpretation.  So  in  this  way  it  becomes  the  ‘evident’

point  of  departure  for  problems  of  epistemology  or  the  ‘metaphysics  of
knowledge’. For what is more obvious than that a ‘subject’ is related to an
‘Object’  and  vice  versa?  This  ‘subject-Object-relationship’  must  be
presupposed. But while this presupposition is unimpeachable in its facticity,
this makes it indeed a baleful one, if its ontological necessity and especially
its ontological meaning are to be left in the dark.

Thus the phenomenon of Being-in has for the most part been represented
exclusively  by  a  single  exemplar—knowing  the  world.  This  has  not  only
been  the  case  in  epistemology;  for  even  practical  behaviour  has  been
understood  as  behaviour  which  is  ‘non-theoretical’  and  ‘atheoretical’.
Because  knowing  has  been  given  this  priority,  our  understanding  of  its
ownmost kind of Being gets led astray, and accordingly Being-in-the-world
must  be  exhibited  even  more  precisely  with  regard  to  knowing  the  world,
and must itself be made visible as an existential ‘modality’ of Being-in.

13. A Founded Mode in which Being-in is Exemplified. Knowing the

1. ‘Die Exemplifizierung des In-Seins an einem fundierten Modus.’ The conception of ‘founded’
modes  is  taken  from  Husserl,  who  introduces  the  concept  of  ‘founding’  in  his  Logische
Untersuchungen, vol. II, Part I, chapter 2 (second edition, Halle, 1913, p. 261). This passage has been
closely  paraphrased  as  follows  by  Marvin  Farber  in  his  The  Foundation  of  Phenomenology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1943, p. 297; ‘If in accordance with essential law an α can only exist in a
comprehensive unity which connects it with a μ, then we say, an α as such needs foundation through
a μ, or also, an α as such is in need of completion by means of a μ. If accordingly α0, μ0 are definite
particular  cases  of  the  pure  genera  α,  or  μ,  which  stand  in  the  cited  relationship,  and  if  they  are
members of one whole, then say that α0 is founded by μ0; and it is exclusively founded by μ0 if the
need of the completion of α0 is alone satisfied by μ0. This terminology can be applied to the species
themselves; the equivocation is harmless.’ Thus a founded mode of Being-in is simply a mode which
can subsist only when connected with something else.

World.
 

H. 60

 

If Being-in-the-world is a basic state of Dasein, and one in which Dasein
operates not only in general but pre-eminently in the mode of everydayness,
then  it  must  also  be  something  which  has  always  been  experienced
ontically. It would be unintelligible for Being-in-the-world to remain totally
veiled  from  view,  especially  since  Dasein  has  at  its  disposal  an
this
its  own  Being,  no  matter  how 
understanding  of 

indefinitely 

understanding  may  function.  But  no  sooner  was  the  ‘phenomenon  of
knowing the world’ grasped than it got interpreted in a ‘superficial’, formal
manner.  The  evidence  for  this  is  the  procedure  (still  customary  today)  of
setting up knowing as a ‘relation between subject and Object’—a procedure
in which there lurks as much ‘truth’ as vacuity. But subject and Object do
not coincide with Dasein and the world.

Even  if  it  were  feasible  to  give  an  ontological  definition  of  “Being-in”
primarily  in  terms  of  a  Being-in-the-world  which  knows,  it  would  still  be
our first task to show that knowing has the phenomenal character of a Being
which is in and towards the world. If one reflects upon this relationship of
Being, an entity called “Nature” is given proximally as that which becomes
known. Knowing, as such, is not to be met in this entity. If knowing ‘is’ at
all,  it  belongs  solely  to  those  entities  which  know.  But  even  in  those
entities,  human-Things,  knowing  is  not  present-at-hand.  In  any  case,  it  is
not  externally  ascertainable  as,  let  us  say,  bodily  properties  are.(1)  Now,
inasmuch  as  knowing  belongs  to  these  entities  and  is  not  some  external
characteristic,  it  must  be  ‘inside’.  Now  the  more  unequivocally  one
maintains that knowing is proximally and really ‘inside’ and indeed has by
no  means  the  same  kind  of  Being  as  entities  which  are  both  physical  and
psychical,  the  less  one  presupposes  when  one  believes  that  one  is  making
headway  in  the  question  of  the  essence  of  knowledge  and  in  the
clarification of the  relationship between subject  and Object. For  only  then
can  the  problem  arise  of  how  this  knowing  subject  comes  out  of  its  inner
‘sphere’ into one which is ‘other and external’, of how knowing can have
any  object  at  all,  and  of  how  one  must  think  of  the  object  itself  so  that
eventually  the  subject  knows  it  without  needing  to  venture  a  leap  into
another  sphere.  But  in  any  of  the  numerous  varieties  which  this  approach
may take, the question of the kind of Being which belongs to this knowing
subject is left entirely unasked, though whenever its knowing gets handled,
its way of Being is already included tacitly in one’s theme. Of course we are
sometimes  assured  that  we  are  certainly  not  to  think  of  the  subject’s
“inside”  [Innen]  and  its  ‘inner  sphere’  as  a  sort  of  ‘box’  or  ‘cabinet’.  But
when one asks for the positive signification of this ‘inside’ of immanence in
which  knowing  is  proximally  enclosed,  or  when  one  inquires  how  this
‘Being  inside’  [“Innenseins”]  which  knowing  possesses  has  its  own
character  of  Being  grounded  in  the  kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to  the
subject,  then  silence reigns. And no matter how this inner  sphere  may  get

interpreted, if one does no more than ask how knowing makes its way ‘out
of’  it  and  achieves  ‘transcendence’,  it  becomes  evident  that  the  knowing
which  presents  such  enigmas  will  remain  problematical  unless  one  has
previously clarified how it is and what it is.
 

1.  ‘In  jedem  Falle  ist  est  nicht  so  äusserlich  feststellbar  wie  etwa  leibliche  Eigenschaften.  The

older editions have ‘…nicht ist es...’ and place a comma after ‘feststellbar’.

H. 61

 

With this kind of approach one remains blind to what is already tacitly
implied even when one takes the phenomenon of knowing as one’s theme in
the most provisional manner: namely, that knowing is a mode of Being of
Dasein  as  Being-in-the-world,  and  is  founded  ontically  upon  this  state  of
Being. But if, as we suggest, we thus find phenomenally that knowing is a
kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to  Being-in-the-world,  one  might  object  that
with  such  an  Interpretation  of  knowing,  the  problem  of  knowledge  is
nullified;  for  what  is  left  to  be  asked  if  one  presupposes  that  knowing  is
already  ‘alongside’  its  world,  when  it  is  not  supposed  to  reach  that  world
except in the transcending of the subject? In this question the constructivist
‘standpoint’, which has not been phenomenally demonstrated, again comes
to the fore; but quite apart from this, what higher court is to decide whether
and in what sense there is to be any problem of knowledge other than that
of  the  phenomenon  of  knowing  as  such  and  the  kind  of  Being  which
belongs to the knower?

If  we  now  ask  what  shows  itself  in  the  phenomenal  findings  about
knowing, we must keep in mind that knowing is grounded beforehand in a
Being-already-alongside-the-world,  which  is  essentially  constitutive  for
Dasein’s  Being.(1)  Proximally,  this  Being-already-alongside  is  not  just  a
fixed  staring  at  something  that  is  purely  present-at-hand.  Being-in-the-
world, as concern, is fascinated by the world with which it is concerned.(2)
If  knowing  is  to  be  possible  as  a  way  of  determining  the  nature  of  the
present-at-hand  by  observing  it,(3)  then  there  must  first  be  a  deficiency in
our  having-to-do  with  the  world  concernfully.  When  concern  holds  back
[Sichenthalten]  from  any  kind  of  producing,  manipulating,  and  the  like,  it
puts itself into what is now the sole remaining mode of Being-in, the mode
of  just  tarrying  alongside...  [das  Nur-noch-verweilen  bei…]  This  kind  of

Being towards the world is one which lets us encounter entities within-the-
world purely in the way they look (εἶδος), just that; on the basis of this kind
of  Being,  and  as a  mode  of  it,  looking  explicitly  at  what  we  encounter  is
possible.(4) Looking at something in this way is sometimes a definite way
of taking up  a direction towards  something—of setting our sights  towards
what  is  present-at-hand.  It  takes  over  a  ‘view-point’  in  advance  from  the
entity which it encounters.
 

1. ‘…dass das Erkennen selbst vorgängig gründet in einem Schon-sein-bei-der-Welt, als welches

das Sein von Dasein wesenhaft konstituiert.’

2. ‘Das In-der-Welt-sein ist als Besorgen von der besorgten Welt benommen.’ Here we follow the

older editions. The newer editions have ‘das Besorgen’ instead of ‘als Besorgen’.

3. ‘Damit Erkennen als betrachtendes Bestimmen des Vorhandenen möglich sei…’ Here too we

follow the older editions. The newer editions again have ‘das’ instead of ‘als’.

4. ‘Auf dem Grunde dieser Seinsart zur Welt, die das innerweltlich begegnende Seiende nur noch
in  seinem  puren  Aussehen  (εἶδος)  begegnen  lässt,  und  als  Modus  dieser  Seinsart  ist  ein
ausdruckliches Hinsehen auf das so Begenende möglich.’

H. 62

 

Such  looking-at  enters  the  mode  of  dwelling  autonomously  alongside
entities within-the-world.(1) In this kind of ‘dwelling’ as a holding-oneself-
back from any manipulation or utilization, the perception of the present-at-
hand  is  consummated.(2)  Perception  is  consummated  when  one  addresses
oneself  to  something  as  something  and  discusses  it  as  such.(3)  This
amounts  to  interpretation in  the  broadest  sense;  and  on  the  basis  of  such
interpretation, perception becomes an act of making determinate.(4) What is
thus perceived and made determinate can be expressed in propositions, and
can  be  retained  and  preserved  as  what  has  thus  been  asserted.  This
perceptive  retention  of  an  assertion(5)  about  something  is  itself  a  way  of
Being-in-the-world; it is not to be Interpreted as a ‘procedure’ by which a
subject  provides  itself  with  representations  [Vorstellungen]  of  something
which remain stored up ‘inside’ as having been thus appropriated, and with
regard  to  which  the  question  of  how  they  ‘agree’  with  actuality  can
occasionally arise.
 

1. ‘Solches Hinsehen kommt selbst in den Modus eines eigenständigen Sichaufhaltens bei dem

innerweltlichen Seienden.’

2. ‘In sogearteten “Aufenthalt”—als dem Sichenthalten von jeglicher Hantierung and Nutzung—
vollzieht sich das Vernehmen des Vorhandenen.’ The word ‘Aufenthalt’ normally means a stopping-
off at some place, a sojourn, an abiding, or even an abode or dwelling. Here the author is exploiting

the fact that it includes both the prefixes ‘auf-’ and ‘ent-’, which we find in the verbs ‘aufhalten’ and
‘enthalten’. ‘Aufhalten’ means to hold something at a stage which it has reached, to arrest it, to stop
it;  when  used  reflexively  it  can  mean  to  stay  at  a  place,  to  dwell  there.  While  ‘enthalten’  usually
means to contain, it preserves its more literal meaning of holding back or refraining, when it is used
reflexively. All these meanings are presumably packed into the word ‘Aufenthalt’ as used here, and
are hardly suggested by our ‘dwelling’.

3. ‘Das Vernehmen hat die Vollzugsart des Ansprechens und Besprechens von etwas als etwas.’
On ‘something as something’ see Section 32 below (H. 149), where ‘interpretation’ is also discussed.

4. ‘…wird das Vernehmen zum Bestimmen.’
5. ‘Aussage’. For further discussion see Section 33 below.

When Dasein directs itself towards something and grasps it, it does not
somehow  first  get  out  of  an  inner  sphere  in  which  it  has  been  proximally
encapsulated,  but  its  primary  kind  of  Being  is  such  that  it  is  always
‘outside’ alongside entities which it encounters and which belong to a world
already discovered. Nor is any inner sphere abandoned when Dasein dwells
alongside the entity to be known, and determines its character; but even in
this  ‘Being-outside’  alongside  the  object,  Dasein  is  still  ‘inside’,  if  we
understand  this  in  the  correct  sense;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  itself  ‘inside’  as  a
Being-in-the-world which knows. And furthermore, the perceiving of what
is known is not a process of returning with one’s booty to the ‘cabinet’ of
consciousness  after  one  has  gone  out  and  grasped  it;  even  in  perceiving,
retaining, and preserving, the Dasein which knows remains outside,  and it
does so as Dasein. If I ‘merely’ know [Wissen] about some way in which
the Being of entities is interconnected, if I ‘only’ represent them, if I ‘do no
more’ than ‘think’ about them, I am no less alongside the entities outside in
the  world  than  when  I  originally  grasp  them.(1)  Even  the  forgetting  of
something, in which every relationship of Being towards what one formerly
knew has seemingly been obliterated, must be conceived as a modification
of the primordial Being-in; and this holds for every delusion and for every
error.

We have now pointed out how those modes of Being-in-the-world which
are  constitutive  for  knowing  the  world  are  interconnected  in  their
foundations;  this  makes  it  plain  that  in  knowing,  Dasein  achieves  a  new
status  of  Being  [Seinsstand]  towards  a  world  which  has  already  been
discovered in Dasein itself. This new possibility of Being can develop itself
autonomously;  it  can  become  a  task  to  be  accomplished,  and  as  scientific
knowledge  it  can  take  over  the  guidance  for  Being-in-the-world.  But  a
‘commercium’ of the subject with a world does not get created for the first
time by knowing, nor does it arise from some way in which the world acts

upon a subject. Knowing is a mode of Dasein founded upon Being-in-the-
world.  Thus  Being-in-the-world,  as  a  basic  state,  must  be  Interpreted
beforehand.
 

1. ‘…bei einem originären Erfassen.’

III: THE WORLDHOOD OF THE WORLD

 

 

 

H. 63

14. The Idea of the Worldhood of the World in General

1.  “Welt’,  ‘weltlich’,  ‘Weltlichkeit’,  “Weltmässigkeit’.  We  shall  usually  translate  ‘Welt’  as  ‘the
world’ or ‘a world’, following English idiom, though Heidegger frequently omits the article when he
wishes to refer to ‘Welt’ as a ‘characteristic’ of Dasein. In ordinary German the adjective ‘weltlich’
and the derivative noun ‘Weltlichkeit’ have much the same connotations as the English ‘worldly’ and
‘worldliness’;  but  the  meanings  which  Heidegger  assigns  to  them  (H.  65)  are  quite  different  from
those  of  their  English  cognates.  At  the  risk  of  obscuring  the  etymological  connection  and
occasionally  misleading  the  reader,  we  shall  translate  ‘weltlich’  as  ‘worldly’,  ‘Weltlichkeit’  as
‘worldhood’, and ‘Weltmässigkeit’ as ‘worldly character’. The reader must bear in mind, however,
that there is no suggestion here of the ‘worldliness’ of the ‘man of the world’.

BEING-IN-THE-WORLD shall first be made visible with regard to that
item  of  its  structure  which  is  the  ‘world’  itself.  To  accomplish  this  task
seems easy and so trivial as to make one keep taking for granted that it may
be  dispensed  with.  What  can  be  meant  by  describing  ‘the  world’  as  a
phenomenon? It means to let us see what shows itself in ‘entities’ within the
world. Here the first step is to enumerate the things that are ‘in’ the world:
houses, trees, people, mountains, stars. We can depict the way such entities
‘look’, and we can give an account of occurrences in them and with them.
This,  however,  is  obviously  a  pre-phenomenological  ‘business’  which
cannot be at all relevant phenomenologically. Such a description is always
confined to entities. It is ontical. But what we are seeking is Being. And we
have formally defined ‘phenomenon’ in the phenomenological sense as that
which shows itself as Being and as a structure of Being.

Thus, to give a phenomenological description of the ‘world’ will mean to
exhibit  the  Being  of  those  entities  which  are  present-at-hand  within  the
world, and to fix it in concepts which are categorial. Now the entities within
the world are Things—Things of Nature, and Things ‘invested with value’
[“wertbehaftete”  Dinge].  Their  Thinghood  becomes  a  problem;  and  to  the

extent that the Thinghood of Things ‘invested with value’ is based upon the
Thinghood of Nature, our primary theme is the Being of Things of Nature
—Nature as such. That characteristic of Being which belongs to Things of
is
Nature 
substantiality.  What  is  its  ontological  meaning?  By  asking  this,  we  have
given an unequivocal direction to our inquiry.

(substances),  and  upon  which  everything 

founded, 

is 

But  is  this  a  way  of  asking  ontologically  about  the  ‘world’?  The
problematic  which  we  have  thus  marked  out  is  one  which  is  undoubtedly
ontological.  But  even  if  this  ontology  should  itself  succeed  in  explicating
the Being of Nature in the very purest manner, in conformity with the basic
assertions  about  this  entity,  which  the  mathematical  natural  sciences
provide,  it  will  never  reach  the  phenomenon  that  is  the  ‘world’.  Nature  is
itself  an  entity  which  is  encountered  within  the  world  and  which  can  be
discovered in various ways and at various stages.

H. 64

 

Should we then first attach ourselves to those entities with which Dasein
proximally and for the most part dwells—Things ‘invested with value’? Do
not these ‘really’ show us the world in which we live? Perhaps, in fact, they
show  us  something  like  the  ‘world’  more  penetratingly.  But  these  Things
too are entities ‘within’ the world.

Neither  the  ontical  depiction  of  entities  within-the-world  nor  the
ontological  Interpretation  of  their  Being  is  such  as  to  reach  the
phenomenon  of  the  ‘world.’  In both  of these ways  of access to  ‘Objective
Being’, the ‘world’ has already been ‘presupposed’, and indeed in various
ways.

Is it possible that ultimately we cannot address ourselves to ‘the world’
as determining the nature of the entity we have mentioned? Yet we call this
entity one which is  “within-the-world”. Is ‘world’  perhaps  a characteristic
of Dasein’s Being? And in that case, does every Dasein ‘proximally’ have
its  world?  Does  not  ‘world’  thus  become  something  ‘subjective’?  How,
then, can there be a ‘common’ world ‘in’ which, nevertheless, we are? And
if  we  raise  the  question  of  the  ‘world’,  what  world  do  we  have  in  view?
Neither the common world nor the subjective world, but the worldhood of
the world as such. By what avenue do we meet this phenomenon?

‘Worldhood’  is  an  ontological  concept,  and  stands  for  the  structure  of
one of the constitutive items of Being-in-the-world. But we know Being-in-
the-world  as  a  way  in  which  Dasein’s  character  is  defined  existentially.
Thus  worldhood  itself  is  an  existentiale.  If  we  inquire  ontologically  about
the ‘world’, we by no means abandon the analytic of Dasein as a field for
thematic study. Ontologically, ‘world’ is not a way of characterizing those
entities which Dasein essentially is not; it is rather a characteristic of Dasein
itself.  This  does  not  rule  out  the  possibility  that  when  we  investigate  the
phenomenon of the ‘world’ we must do so by the avenue of entities within-
the-world  and  the  Being  which  they  possess.  The  task  of  ‘describing’  the
world  phenomenologically  is  so  far  from  obvious  that  even  if  we  do  no
more  than  determine  adequately  what  form  it  shall  take,  essential
ontological clarifications will be needed.

This  discussion  of  the  word  ‘world’,  and  our  frequent  use  of  it  have
made it apparent that it is used in several ways. By unravelling these we can
get an indication of the different kinds of phenomena that are signified, and
of the way in which they are interconnected.

1.  “World”  is  used  as  an  ontical  concept,  and  signifies  the  totality  of

those entities which can be present-at-hand within the world.

H. 65

 

2. “World” functions  as an ontological  term,  and signifies  the  Being  of
those  entities  which  we  have  just  mentioned.  And  indeed  ‘world’  can
become a term for any realm which encompasses a multiplicity of entities:
for  instance,  when  one  talks  of  the  ‘world’  of  a  mathematician,  ‘world’
signifies the realm of possible objects of mathematics.

3. “World” can be understood in another ontical sense—not, however, as
those entities which Dasein essentially is not and which can be encountered
within-the-world, but rather as that ‘wherein’ a factical Dasein as such can
be  said 
to  ‘live’.  “World”  has  here  a  pre-ontological  existentiell
signification. Here again there are different possibilities: “world” may stand
for  the  ‘public’  we-world,  or  one’s  ‘own’  closest  (domestic)  environment.
(1)
 

1. ‘…die “eigene” und nächste (häusliche) Umwelt.’ The word ‘Umwelt’, which is customarily
translated  as  ‘environment’,  means  literally  the  ‘world  around’  or  the  ‘world  about’.  The  prefix
‘um-’, however, not only may mean ‘around’ or ‘about’, but, as we shall see, can also be used in an

expression  such  as  ‘um  zu...’,  which  is  most  easily  translated  as  ‘in  order  to’.  Section  15  will  be
largely  devoted  to  a  study  of  several  words  in  which  this  same  prefix  occurs,  though  this  is  by  no
means apparent in the words we have chosen to represent them: ‘Umgang’ (‘dealings’); ‘das Um-zu’
(‘the “in-order-to” ’); ‘Umsicht’ (‘circumspection’).

4.  Finally,  “world”  designates  the  ontologico-existential  concept  of
worldhood.  Worldhood  itself  may  have  as  its  modes  whatever  structural
wholes any special ‘worlds’ may have at the time; but it embraces in itself
the  a  priori  character  of  worldhood  in  general.  We  shall  reserve  the
expression  “world”  as  a  term  for  our  third  signification.  If  we  should
sometimes use it in the first of these senses, we shall mark this with single
quotation marks.

The derivative form ‘worldly’ will then apply terminologically to a kind
of Being which belongs to Dasein, never to a kind which belongs to entities
present-at-hand  ‘in’  the  world.  We  shall  designate  these  latter  entities  as
“belonging  to  the  world”  or  “within-the-world”  [weltzugehörig  oder
innerweltlich].

A glance at previous ontology shows that if one fails to see Being-in-the-
world  as  a  state  of  Dasein,  the  phenomenon  of  worldhood  likewise  gets
passed over. One tries instead to Interpret the world in terms of the Being of
those entities which are present-at-hand within-the-world but which are by
no  means  proximally  discovered—namely,  in  terms  of  Nature.  If  one
understands  Nature  ontologico-categorially,  one  finds  that  Nature  is  a
limiting  case  of  the  Being  of  possible  entities  within-the-world.  Only  in
some  definite  mode  of  its  own  Being-in-the-world  can  Dasein  discover
entities  as  Nature.(1)  This  manner  of  knowing  them  has  the  character  of
depriving  the  world  of  its  worldhood  in  a  definite  way.  ‘Nature’,  as  the
categorial  aggregate  of  those  structures  of  Being  which  a  definite  entity
encountered  within-the-world  may  possess,  can  never  make  worldhood
intelligible.  But  even  the  phenomenon  of  ‘Nature’,  as  it  is  conceived,  for
instance, in romanticism, can be grasped ontologically only in terms of the
concept of the world—that is to say, in terms of the analytic of Dasein.
 

1. ‘Das Seiende als Natur kann das Dasein nur in einem bestimmten Modus seines Inder-Welt-

seins entdecken.’

H. 66

 

When  it  comes  to  the  problem  of  analysing  the  world’s  worldhood
ontologically,  traditional  ontology  operates  in  a  blind  alley,  if,  indeed,  it
sees  this  problem  at  all.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  are  to  Interpret  the
worldhood  of  Dasein  and  the  possible  ways  in  which  Dasein  is  made
worldly [Verweltlichung], we must show why the kind of Being with which
Dasein  knows  the  world  is  such  that  it  passes  over  the  phenomenon  of
worldhood both ontically and ontologically. But at the same time the very
Fact of this passing-over suggests that we must take special precautions to
get the right phenomenal point of departure [Ausgang] for access [Zugang]
to the phenomenon of worldhood, so that it will not get passed over.

Our  method has already been assigned [Anweisung]. The theme  of our
analytic is to be Being-in-the-world, and accordingly the very world itself;
and these are to be considered within the horizon of average everydayness
—the kind of Being which is closest to  Dasein. We must make a study  of
everyday  Being-in-the-world;  with  the  phenomenal  support  which  this
gives us, something like the world must come into view.

the 

seek 

shall 

the  worldhood  of 

the  ‘around’  [“Umherum”]  which 

That world of everyday Dasein which is closest to it, is the environment.
this  existential  character  of  average  Being-in-the-world,  our
From 
investigation will take its course [Gang] towards the idea of worldhood in
general.  We 
environment
(environmentality)  by going  through  an ontological  Interpretation  of those
entities  within-the-environment  which  we  encounter  as  closest  to  us.  The
expression  “environment”  [Umwelt]  contains  in  the  ‘environ’  [“um”]  a
is
suggestion  of  spatiality.  Yet 
constitutive  for  the  environment  does  not  have  a  primarily  ‘spatial’
meaning. Instead, the spatial character which incontestably belongs to any
environment, can be clarified only in terms of the structure of worldhood.
From  this  point  of  view,  Dasein’s  spatiality,  of  which  we  have  given  an
indication  in  Section  12,  becomes  phenomenally  visible.  In  ontology,
however,  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  start  with  spatiality  and  then  to
Interpret the Being of the ‘world’ as res extensa.  In Descartes we  find  the
most  extreme  tendency  towards  such  an  ontology  of  the  ‘world’,  with,
indeed,  a  counter-orientation  towards  the  res  cogitans—which  does  not
coincide  with  Dasein  either  ontically  or  ontologically.  The  analysis  of
worldhood  which  we  are  here  attempting  can  be  made  clearer  if  we  show
how  it  differs  from  such  an  ontological  tendency.  Our  analysis  will  be
completed  in  three  stages:  (A)  the  analysis  of  environmentality  and

worldhood  in  general;  (B) an  illustrative  contrast  between  our  analysis  of
worldhood and Descartes’ ontology of the ‘world’; (C) the aroundness [das
Umhafte] of the environment, and the ‘spatiality’ of Dasein.(1)

A. Analysis of Environmentality and Worldhood in General

15. The Being of the Entities Encountered in the Environment

 

 

 

H. 67

The Being of those entities which we encounter as closest to us can be
exhibited phenomenologically if we take as our clue our everyday Being-in-
the-world,  which  we  also  call  our  “dealings”(2)  in  the  world  and  with
entities within-the-world. Such dealings have already dispersed themselves
into manifold ways of concern.(3) The kind of dealing which is closest to us
is as we have shown, not a bare perceptual cognition, but rather that kind of
concern which manipulates things and puts them to use; and this has its own
kind  of  ‘knowledge’.  The  phenomenological  question  applies  in  the  first
instance to the Being of those entities which we encounter in such concern.
To assure the kind of seeing which is here required, we must first make a
remark about method.
 

1. A is considered in Sections 15-18; B in Sections 19-21; C in Sections 22-24.
2. ‘Umgang’. This word means literally a ‘going around’ or ‘going about’, in a sense not too far
removed  from  what  we  have  in  mind  when  we  say  that  someone  is  ‘going  about  his  business’.
‘Dealings’ is by no means an accurate translation, but is perhaps as convenient as any. ‘Intercourse’
and ‘trafficking’ are also possible translations.

3. See above, H. 57, n. 1.

In the disclosure and explication of Being, entities are in every case our
preliminary  and  our  accompanying  theme  [das  Vor-und  Mitthematische];
but  our  real  theme  is  Being.  In  the  domain  of  the  present  analysis,  the
entities  we  shall  take  as  our  preliminary  theme  are  those  which  show
themselves  in  our  concern  with  the  environment.  Such  entities  are  not
thereby objects for knowing the ‘world’ theoretically; they are simply what
gets used, what gets produced, and so forth. As entities so encountered, they
become  the  preliminary  theme  for  the  purview  of  a  ‘knowing’  which,  as

phenomenological,  looks  primarily  towards  Being,  and  which,  in  thus
taking Being  as its theme,  takes these entities as its accompanying  theme.
This phenomenological interpretation is accordingly not a way of knowing
those  characteristics  of  entities  which  themselves    a  r  e    [seiender
Beschaffenheiten des Seienden]; it is rather a determination of the structure
of  the  Being  which  entities  possess.  But  as  an  investigation  of  Being,  it
brings  to  completion,  autonomously  and  explicitly,  that  understanding  of
Being which belongs already to Dasein and which ‘comes alive’ in any of
its dealings with entities. Those entities which serve phenomenologically as
our preliminary theme—in this case, those which are used or which are to
be  found  in  the  course  of  production—become  accessible  when  we  put
ourselves into the position of concerning ourselves with them in some such
way. Taken strictly, this talk about “putting ourselves into such a position”
[Sichversetzen] is misleading; for the kind of Being which belongs to such
concernful  dealings  is  not  one  into  which  we  need  to  put  ourselves  first.
This is the way in which everyday Dasein always is: when I open the door,
for instance, I use the latch. The achieving of phenomenological access to
the  entities  which  we  encounter,  consists  rather  in  thrusting  aside  our
interpretative  tendencies,  which  keep  thrusting  themselves  upon  us  and
running along with us, and which conceal not only the phenomenon of such
‘concern’, but even more those entities themselves as  encountered of their
own accord in our concern with them. These entangling errors become plain
if  in  the  course  of  our  investigation  we  now  ask  which  entities  shall  be
taken as our preliminary theme and established as the pre-phenomenal basis
for our study.

H. 68

 

One  may  answer:  “Things.”  But  with  this  obvious  answer  we  have
perhaps  already  missed  the  pre-phenomenal  basis  we  are  seeking.  For  in
addressing these entities as ‘Things’ (res), we have tacitly anticipated their
ontological character. When analysis starts with such entities and goes on to
inquire  about  Being,  what  it  meets  is  Thinghood  and  Reality.  Ontological
explication  discovers,  as  it  proceeds,  such  characteristics  of  Being  as
substantiality, materiality, extendedness, side-by-side-ness, and so forth. But
even  pre-ontologically,  in  such  Being  as  this,  the  entities  which  we
encounter  in  concern  are  proximally  hidden.  When  one  designates  Things

as  the  entities  that  are  ‘proximally  given’,  one  goes  ontologically  astray,
even though ontically one has something else in mind. What one really has
in  mind  remains  undetermined.  But  suppose  one  characterizes  these
‘Things’  as  Things  ‘invested  with  value’?  What  does  “value”  mean
ontologically?  How  are  we  to  categorize  this  ‘investing’  and  Being-
invested?  Disregarding  the  obscurity  of  this  structure  of  investiture  with
value,  have  we  thus  met  that  phenomenal  characteristic  of  Being  which
belongs to what we encounter in our concernful dealings?

The Greeks had an appropriate term  for  ‘Things’: πράγματα—that is  to
say, that which one has to do with in one’s concernful dealings (πρᾶξις). But
ontologically, the specifically ‘pragmatic’ character of the πράγματα is  just
what  the  Greeks  left  in  obscurity;  they  thought  of  these  ‘proximally’  as
‘mere Things’. We shall call those entities which we encounter in concern
“equipment”.(1)  In  our  dealings  we  come  across  equipment  for  writing,
sewing,  working,  transportation,  measurement.  The  kind  of  Being  which
equipment possesses must be exhibited. The clue for doing this lies in our
first  defining  what  makes  an 
its
equipmentality.

item  of  equipment—namely, 

Taken strictly, there ‘is’ no such thing as an equipment. To the Being of
any equipment there always belongs a totality of equipment, in which it can
be  this  equipment  that  it  is.  Equipment  is  essentially  ‘something  in-order-
to...’  [“etwas  um-zu...”].  A  totality  of  equipment  is  constituted  by  various
ways  of  the  ‘in-order-to’,  such  as  serviceability,  conduciveness,  usability,
manipulability.

In the ‘in-order-to’ as a structure there lies an assignment or reference of
something  to  something.(2)  Only  in  the  analyses  which  are  to  follow  can
the phenomenon which this term ‘assignment’ indicates be made visible in
its  ontological  genesis.  Provisionally,  it  is  enough  to  take  a  look
phenomenally  at  a  manifold  of  such  assignments.  Equipment—in
accordance  with  its  equipmentality—always  is  in  terms  of  [aus]  its
belonging to other equipment: ink-stand, pen, ink, paper, blotting pad, table,
lamp,  furniture,  windows,  doors,  room.  These  ‘Things’  never  show
themselves proximally as they are for themselves, so as to add up to a sum
of realia and fill up a room. What we encounter as closest to us (though not
as  something  taken  as  a  theme)  is  the  room;  and  we  encounter  it  not  as
something  ‘between  four  walls’  in  a  geometrical  spatial  sense,  but  as
equipment for residing. Out of this the ‘arrangement’ emerges, and it is in

this that any ‘individual’ item of equipment shows itself. Before it does so,
a totality of equipment has already been discovered.
 

1.  ‘das  Zeug’.  The  word  ‘Zeug’  has  no  precise  English  equivalent.  While  it  may  mean  any
implement,  instrument,  or  tool,  Heidegger  uses  it  for  the  most  part  as  a  collective  noun  which  is
analogous  to  our  relatively  specific  ‘gear’  (as  in  ‘gear  for  fishing’)  or  the  more  elaborate
‘paraphernalia’,  or  the  still  more  general  ‘equipment’,  which  we  shall  employ  throughout  this
translation. In this collective sense ‘Zeug’ can sometimes be used in a way which is comparable to
the use of ‘stuff’ in such sentences as ‘there is plenty of stuff lying around’. (See H. 74.) In general,
however,  this  pejorative  connotation  is  lacking.  For  the  most  part  Heidegger  uses  the  term  as  a
collective noun, so that he can say that there is no such thing as ‘an equipment’; but he still uses it
occasionally with an indefinite article to refer to some specific tool or instrument—some item or bit
of equipment.

2.  ‘In  der  Struktur  “Um-zu”  liegt  eine  Verweisung  von  etwas  auf  etwas.’  There  is  no  close
English  equivalent  for  the  word  ‘Verweisung’,  which  occurs  many  times  in  this  chapter.  The  basic
metaphor seems to be that of turning something away towards something else, or pointing it away, as
when one ‘refers’ or ‘commits’ or ‘relegates’ or ‘assigns’ something to something else, whether one
‘refers’ a symbol to what it symbolizes, ‘refers’ a beggar to a welfare agency, ‘commits’ a person for
trial, ‘relegates’ or ‘banishes’ him to Siberia, or even ‘assigns’ equipment to a purpose for which it is
to  be  used.  ‘Verweisung’  thus  does  some  of  the  work  of  ‘reference’,  ‘commitment’,  ‘assignment’,
‘relegation’,  ‘banishment’;  but  it  does  not  do  all  the  work  of  any  of  these  expressions.  For  a
businessman to ‘refer’ to a letter, for a symbol to ‘refer’ to what it symbolizes, for a man to ‘commit
larceny or murder’ or merely to ‘commit himself’ to certain partisan views, for a teacher to give a
pupil  a  long  ‘assignment’,  or  even  for  a  journalist  to  receive  an  ‘assignment’  to  the  Vatican,  we
would have to find some other verb than ‘verweisen’. We shall, however, use the verbs ‘assign’ and
‘refer’ and their derivatives as perhaps the least misleading substitutes, employing whichever seems
the more appropriate in the context, and occasionally using a hendiadys as in the present passage. See
Section 17 for further discussion. (When other words such as ‘anweisen’ or ‘zuweisen’ are translated
as ‘assign’, we shall usually subjoin the German in brackets.)

H. 69

 

Equipment  can  genuinely  show  itself  only  in  dealings  cut  to  its  own
measure (hammering with a hammer, for example); but in such dealings an
entity of this kind is not grasped thematically as an occurring Thing, nor is
the equipment-structure known as such even in the using. The hammering
does  not  simply  have  knowledge  about  [um]  the  hammer’s  character  as
equipment, but it has appropriated this equipment in a way which could not
possibly be more suitable. In dealings such as this, where something is put
to  use,  our  concern  subordinates  itself  to  the  “in-order-to”  which  is
constitutive for the equipment we are employing at the time; the less we just
stare at the hammer-Thing, and the more we seize hold of it and use it, the
more primordial does our relationship to it become, and the more unveiledly
is  it  encountered  as  that  which  it  is—as  equipment.  The  hammering  itself

uncovers the specific ‘manipulability’ [“Handlichkeit”] of the hammer. The
kind  of  Being  which  equipment  possesses—in  which  it  manifests  itself  in
its  own  right—we  call  “readiness-to-hand”  [Zuhandenheit].(1)  Only
because equipment has this ‘Being-in-itself’ and does not merely occur, is it
manipulable  in  the  broadest  sense  and  at  our  disposal.  No  matter  how
sharply  we  just  look  [Nur-noch-hinsehen]  at  the  ‘outward  appearance’
[“Aussehen]”  of  Things  in  whatever  form  this  takes,  we  cannot  discover
anything ready-to-hand. If we look at Things just ‘theoretically’, we can get
along  without  understanding  readiness-to-hand.  But  when  we  deal  with
them by using them and manipulating them, this activity is not a blind one;
it has its own kind of sight, by which our manipulation is guided and from
which  it  acquires  its  specific  Thingly  character.  Dealings  with  equipment
subordinate  themselves  to  the  manifold  assignments  of  the  ‘in-order-to’.
And 
is
circumspection.(2)
 

the  sight  with  which 

thus  accommodate 

themselves 

they 

1. Italics only in earlier editions.
2. The word ‘Umsicht’, which we translate by ‘circumspection’, is here presented as standing for
a special kind of ‘Sicht’ (‘sight’). Here, as elsewhere, Heidegger is taking advantage of the fact that
the prefix ‘um’ may mean either ‘around’ or ‘in order to’. ‘Umsicht’ may accordingly be thought of
as meaning ‘looking around’ or ‘looking around for something’ or ‘looking around for a way to get
something done’. In ordinary German usage, ‘Umsicht’ seems to have much the same connotation as
our ‘circumspection’—a kind of awareness in which one looks around before one decides just what
one ought to do next. But Heidegger seems to be generalizing this notion as well as calling attention
to  the  extent  to  which  circumspection  in  the  narrower  sense  occurs  in  our  every-day  living.  (The
distinction between ‘sight’ (Sicht’) and ‘seeing’ (‘Sehen’) will be developed further in Sections 31
and 36 below.)

‘Practical’ behaviour is not ‘atheoretical’ in the sense of “sightlessness”.
(1) The way it differs from theoretical behaviour does not lie simply in the
fact that in theoretical behaviour one observes, while in practical behaviour
one  acts  [gehandelt  wird],  and  that  action  must  employ  theoretical
cognition if it is not to remain blind; for the fact that observation is a kind of
concern is just as primordial as the fact that action has its own kind of sight.
Theoretical behaviour is just looking, without circumspection. But the fact
that  this  looking  is  non-circumspective  does  not  mean  that  it  follows  no
rules: it constructs a canon for itself in the form of method.

The  ready-to-hand  is  not  grasped  theoretically  at  all,  nor  is  it  itself  the
sort  of  thing  that  circumspection  takes  proximally  as  a  circumspective
theme.  The  peculiarity  of  what  is  proximally  ready-to-hand  is  that,  in  its

readiness-to-hand,  it  must,  as  it  were,  withdraw  [zurückzuziehen]  in  order
to  be  ready-to-hand  quite  authentically.  That  with  which  our  everyday
dealings  proximally  dwell  is  not  the  tools  themselves  [die  Werkzeuge
selbst]. On the contrary, that with which we concern ourselves primarily is
the work—that which is to be produced at the time; and this is accordingly
ready-to-hand  too.  The  work  bears  with  it  that  referential  totality  within
which the equipment is encountered.(2)
 

1.  ‘…im  Sinne  der  Sichtlosigkeit...’  The  point  of  this  sentence  will  be  clear  to  the  reader  who
recalls that the Greek verb θεωρεῖν, from which the words ‘theoretical’ and ‘atheoretical’ are derived,
originally  meant  ‘to  see’.  Heidegger  is  pointing  out  that  this  is  not  what  we  have  in  mind  in  the
traditional contrast between the ‘theoretical’ and the ‘practical’.

2. ‘Das Werk trägt die Verweisungsganzheit, innerhalb derer das Zeug begegnet.’ In this chapter
the word ‘Werk’ (‘work’) usually refers to the product achieved by working rather than to the process
of working as such. We shall as a rule translate ‘Verweisungsganzheit’ as ‘referential totality’, though
sometimes  the  clumsier  ‘totality  of  assignments’  may  convey  the  idea  more  effectively.  (The  older
editions read ‘deren’ rather than ‘derer’.)

H. 70

 

The work to be produced, as the “towards-which” of such things as the
hammer,  the  plane,  and  the  needle,  likewise  has  the  kind  of  Being  that
belongs  to  equipment.  The  shoe  which  is  to  be  produced  is  for  wearing
(footgear) [Schuhzeug]; the clock is manufactured for telling the time. The
work which we chiefly encounter in our concernful dealings—the work that
is  to  be  found  when  one  is  “at  work”  on  something  [das  in  Arbeit
befindliche]—has  a  usability  which  belongs  to  it  essentially;  in  this
usability  it  lets  us  encounter  already  the  “towards-which”  for  which  it  is
usable. A work that someone has ordered [das bestellte Werk]  i s  only  by
reason of its use and the assignment-context of entities which is discovered
in using it.

But  the  work  to  be  produced  is  not  merely  usable  for  something.  The
production itself is a using of something for something. In the work there is
also  a  reference  or  assignment  to  ‘materials’:  the  work  is  dependent  on
[angewiesen auf] leather, thread, needles, and the like. Leather, moreover is
produced  from  hides.  These  are  taken  from  animals,  which  someone  else
has raised. Animals also occur within the world without having been raised
at all; and, in a way, these entities still produce themselves even when they
have been raised. So in the environment certain entities become accessible

which  are  always  ready-to-hand,  but  which,  in  themselves,  do  not  need  to
be produced. Hammer, tongs, and needle, refer in themselves to steel, iron,
metal,  mineral,  wood,  in  that  they  consist  of  these.  In  equipment  that  is
used, ‘Nature’ is discovered along with it by that use—the ‘Nature’ we find
in natural products.

Here,  however,  “Nature”  is  not  to  be  understood  as  that  which  is  just
present-at-hand, nor as the power of Nature. The wood is a forest of timber,
the mountain a quarry of rock; the river is water-power, the wind is wind ‘in
the sails’. As the ‘environment’ is discovered, the ‘Nature’ thus discovered
is encountered too. If its kind of Being as ready-to-hand is disregarded, this
‘Nature’ itself can be discovered and defined simply in its pure presence-at-
hand.  But  when  this  happens,  the  Nature  which  ‘stirs  and  strives’,  which
assails  us  and  enthralls  us  as  landscape,  remains  hidden.  The  botanist’s
plants  are  not  the  flowers  of  the  hedgerow;  the  ‘source’  which  the
geographer establishes for a river is not the ‘springhead in the dale’.

H. 71

 

The  work  produced  refers  not  only  to  the  “towards-which”  of  its
usability  and  the  “whereof”  of  which  it  consists:  under  simple  craft
conditions it also has an assignment to the person who is to use it or wear it.
The  work  is  cut  to  his  figure;  he  ‘is’  there  along  with  it  as  the  work
emerges.  Even  when  goods  are  produced  by  the  dozen,  this  constitutive
assignment is by no means lacking; it is merely indefinite, and points to the
random,  the  average.  Thus  along  with  the  work,  we  encounter  not  only
entities  ready-to-hand  but  also  entities  with  Dasein’s  kind  of  Being—
entities for which, in their concern, the product becomes ready-to-hand; and
together with these we encounter the world in which wearers and users live,
which is at the same time ours. Any work with which one concerns oneself
is ready-to-hand not only in the domestic world of the workshop but also in
the public  world. Along  with  the  public  world,  the environing  Nature  [die
Umweltnatur] is discovered and is accessible to everyone. In roads, streets,
bridges,  buildings,  our  concern  discovers  Nature  as  having  some  definite
direction.  A  covered  railway  platform  takes  account  of  bad  weather;  an
installation  for  public  lighting  takes  account  of  the  darkness,  or  rather  of
specific changes in the presence or absence of daylight—the ‘position of the
sun’.  In  a  clock,  account  is  taken  of  some  definite  constellation  in  the

world-system. When we look at the clock, we tacitly make use of the ‘sun’s
position’, in accordance with which the measurement of time gets regulated
in  the  official  astronomical  manner.  When  we  make  use  of  the  clock-
equipment,  which  is  proximally  and  inconspicuously  ready-to-hand,  the
environing Nature is ready-to-hand along with it. Our concernful absorption
in whatever work-world lies closest to us, has a function of discovering; and
it is essential to this function that, depending upon the way in which we are
absorbed, 
those  entities  within-the-world  which  are  brought  along
[beigebrachte] in the work and with it (that is to say, in the assignments or
references  which  are  constitutive  for  it)  remain  discoverable  in  varying
degrees of explicitness and with a varying circumspective penetration.

The kind of Being which belongs to these entities is readiness-to-hand.
But  this  characteristic  is  not  to  be  understood  as  merely  a  way  of  taking
them,  as  if  we  were  talking  such  ‘aspects’  into  the  ‘entities’  which  we
proximally  encounter,  or  as  if  some  world-stuff  which  is  proximally
present-at-hand  in  itself(1)  were  ‘given  subjective  colouring’  in  this  way.
Such an Interpretation would overlook the fact that in this case these entities
would  have  to  be  understood  and  discovered  beforehand  as  something
purely  present-at-hand,  and  must  have  priority  and  take  the  lead  in  the
sequence  of  those  dealings  with  the  ‘world’  in  which  something  is
discovered  and  made  one’s  own.  But  this  already  runs  counter  to  the
ontological  meaning  of  cognition,  which  we  have  exhibited  as  a  founded
mode of Being-in-the-world.(2) To lay bare what is just present-at-hand and
no more, cognition must first penetrate beyond what is ready-to-hand in our
concern.  Readiness-to-hand  is  the  way  in  which  entities  as  they  are  ‘in
themselves’  are  defined  ontologico-categorially.  Yet  only  by  reason  of
something  present-at-hand,  ‘is  there’  anything  ready-to-hand.  Does  it
follow, however, granting this thesis for the nonce, that readiness-to-hand is
ontologically founded upon presence-at-hand?
 

1. ‘...ein zünächst an sich vorhandener Weltstoff...’ The earlier editions have ‘...zunächst ein an

sich vorhandener Weltstoff...’
2. See H. 61 above.

H. 72

 

But even if, as our ontological Interpretation proceeds further, readiness-
to-hand  should  prove  itself  to  be  the  kind  of  Being  characteristic  of  those

entities  which  are  proximally  discovered  within-the-world,  and  even  if  its
primordiality as compared with pure presence-at-hand can be demonstrated,
have all these explications been of the slightest help towards understanding
the  phenomenon  of  the  world  ontologically?  In  Interpreting  these  entities
within-the-world, however, we have always ‘presupposed’ the world. Even
if  we  join  them  together,  we  still  do  not  get  anything  like  the  ‘world’  as
their  sum.  If,  then,  we  start  with  the  Being  of  these  entities,  is  there  any
avenue that will lead us to exhibiting the phenomenon of the world?(i)
 

i. The author may remark that this analysis of the environment and in general the ‘hermeneutic of
the facticity’ of Dasein, have been presented repeatedly in his lectures since the winter semester of
1919—1920.

16. How the Worldly Character of the Environment Announces itself

in Entities Within-the-world
 

1. ‘Die am innerweltlich Seienden sich meldende Weltmässigkeit der Umwelt.’

The  world  itself  is  not  an  entity  within-the-world;  and  yet  it  is  so
determinative for such entities that only in so far as ‘there is’ a world can
they be encountered and show themselves, in their Being, as entities which
have  been  discovered.  But  in  what  way  ‘is  there’  a  world?  If  Dasein  is
ontically constituted by Being-in-the-World, and if an understanding of the
Being  of  its  Self  belongs  just  as  essentially  to  its  Being,  no  matter  how
indefinite  that  understanding  may  be,  then  does  not  Dasein  have  an
understanding of the world—a pre-ontological understanding, which indeed
can  and  does  get  along  without  explicit  ontological  insights?  With  those
entities  which  are  encountered  within-the-world—that  is  to  say,  with  their
character  as  within-the-world—does  not  something  like  the  world  show
itself  for  concernful  Being-in-the-world?  Do  we  not  have  a  pre-
phenomenological  glimpse  of  this  phenomenon?  Do  we  not  always  have
such  a  glimpse  of  it,  without  having  to  take  it  as  a  theme  for  ontological
Interpretation? Has Dasein itself, in the range of its concernful absorption in
equipment ready-to-hand, a possibility of Being in which the worldhood of
those  entities  within-the-world  with  which  it  is  concerned  is,  in  a  certain
way, lit up for it, along with those entities themselves?

If  such  possibilities  of  Being  for  Dasein  can  be  exhibited  within  its
concernful  dealings,  then  the  way  lies  open  for  studying  the  phenomenon
which is thus lit up, and for attempting to ‘hold it at bay’, as it were, and to
interrogate it as to those structures which show themselves therein.

H. 73

 

To the everydayness of Being-in-the-world there belong certain modes of
concern.  These  permit  the  entities  with  which  we  concern  ourselves  to  be
encountered in such a way that the worldly character of what is within-the-
world  comes  to  the  fore.  When  we  concern  ourselves  with  something,  the
entities  which  are  most  closely  ready-to-hand  may  be  met  as  something
unusable, not properly adapted for the use we have decided upon. The tool
turns out to be damaged, or the material unsuitable. In each of these cases
equipment is here, ready-to-hand. We discover its unusability, however, not
by  looking  at  it  and  establishing  its  properties,  but  rather  by  the
circumspection of the dealings in which we use it. When its unusability is
thus  discovered,  equipment  becomes  conspicuous.  This  conspicuousness
presents the ready-to-hand equipment as in a certain un-readiness-to-hand.
But this implies that what cannot be used just lies there; it shows itself as an
equipmental  Thing  which  looks  so  and  so,  and  which,  in  it  readiness-to-
hand  as  looking  that  way,  has  constantly  been  present-at-hand  too.  Pure
presence-at-hand announces itself in such equipment, but only to withdraw
to  the  readiness-to-hand  of  something  with  which  one  concerns  oneself—
that is to say, of the sort of thing we find when we put it back into repair.
This presence-at-hand of something that cannot be used is still not devoid of
all  readiness-to-hand  whatsoever;  equipment  which  is  present-at-hand  in
this way is  still  not  just  a  Thing  which  occurs  somewhere.  The  damage  to
the  equipment  is  still  not  a  mere  alteration  of  a  Thing—not  a  change  of
properties which just occurs in something present-at-hand.

In  our  concernful  dealings,  however,  we  not  only  come  up  against
unusable  things  within what  is  ready-to-hand  already:  we  also  find  things
which are missing—which not only are not ‘handy’ [“handlich”] but are not
‘to hand’ [“zur Hand”] at all. Again, to miss something in this way amounts
to coming across something un-ready-to-hand. When we notice what is un-
ready-to-hand,  that  which    i  s    ready-to-hand  enters  the  mode  of
obtrusiveness. The more urgently [Je dringlicher] we need what is missing,

and the more authentically it is encountered in its un-readiness-to-hand, all
the more obtrusive [um so aufdringlicher] does that which is ready-to-hand
become—so  much  so,  indeed,  that  it  seems  to  lose  its  character  of
readiness-to-hand. It reveals itself as something just present-at-hand and no
more,  which  cannot  be  budged  without  the  thing  that  is  missing.  The
helpless way in which we stand before it is a deficient mode of concern, and
as  such 
the  Being-just-present-at-hand-and-no-more  of
it  uncovers 
something ready-to-hand.

H. 74

 

In  our  dealings  with  the  world(1)  of  our  concern,  the  un-ready-to-hand
can be encountered not only in the sense of that which is unusable or simply
missing, but as something un-ready-to-hand which is not missing at all and
not unusable, but which ‘stands in the way’ of our concern. That to which
our concern refuses to turn, that for which it has ‘no time’, is something un-
ready-to-hand in the manner of what does not belong here, of what has not
as yet been attended to. Anything which is un-ready-to-hand in this way is
disturbing to us, and enables us to see the obstinacy of that with which we
must concern ourselves in the first instance before we do anything else.
 

1.  In  the  earlier  editions  ‘Welt’  appears  with  quotation  marks.  These  are  omitted  in  the  later

editions.

With  this  obstinacy,  the  presence-at-hand  of  the  ready-to-hand  makes
itself known in a new way as the Being of that which still lies before us and
calls for our attending to it.(1)

The modes of conspicuousness, obtrusiveness, and obstinacy all have the
function  of  bringing  to  the  fore  the  characteristic  of  presence-at-hand  in
which is ready-to-hand. But the ready-to-hand is not thereby just observed
and  stared  at  as  something  present-at-hand;  the  presence-at-hand  which
makes itself known is still bound up in the readiness-to-hand of equipment.
Such  equipment  still  does  not  veil  itself  in  the  guise  of  mere  Things.  It
becomes  ‘equipment’  in  the  sense  of  something  which  one  would  like  to
shove out of the way.(2) But in such a Tendency to shove things aside, the
ready-to-hand shows itself as still ready-to-hand in its unswerving presence-
at-hand.

 

(Auffälligkeit’), 

‘conspicuousness’ 

1.  Heidegger’s  distinction  between 

‘obtrusiveness’
(‘Aufdringlichkeit’),  and  ‘obstinacy’  (‘Aufsässigkeit’)  is  hard  to  present  unambiguously  in
translation.  He  seems  to  have  in  mind  three  rather  similar  situations.  In  each  of  these  we  are
confronted by a number of articles which are ready-to-hand. In the first situation we wish to use one
of these articles for some purpose, but we find that it cannot be used for that purpose. It then becomes
‘conspicuous’ or ‘striking’, and in a way ‘un-ready-to-hand’—in that we are not able to use it. In the
second  situation  we  may  have  precisely  the  same  articles  before  us,  but  we  want  one  which  is  not
there. In this case the missing article too is ‘un-ready-to-hand’, but in another way—in that it is not
there  to  be  used.  This  is  annoying,  and  the  articles  which  are  still  ready-to-hand  before  us,  thrust
themselves  upon  us  in  such  a  way  that  they  become  ‘obtrusive’  or  even  ‘obnoxious’.  In  the  third
situation, some of the articles which are ready-to-hand before us are experienced as obstacles to the
achievement  of  some  purpose;  as  obstacles  they  are  ‘obstinate’,  ‘recalcitrant’,  ‘refractory’,  and  we
have  to  attend  to  them  or  dispose  of  them  in  some  way  before  we  can  finish  what  we  want  to  do.
Here again the obstinate objects are un-ready-to-hand, but simply in the way of being obstinate.

In all three situations the articles which are ready-to-hand for us tend to lose their readiness-to-
hand in one way or another and reveal their presence-at-hand; only in the second situation, however,
do we encounter them as ‘just present-at-hand and no more’ (‘nur noch Vorhandenes’).
2. Here ‘Zeug’ is used in the pejorative sense of ‘stuff’. See our note 1, H. 68.

Now  that  we  have  suggested,  however,  that  the  ready-to-hand  is  thus
encountered under modifications in which its presence-at-hand is revealed,
how far does this clarify the phenomenon of the world? Even in  analysing
these modifications we have not gone beyond the Being of what is within-
the-world,  and  we  have  come  no  closer  to  the  world-phenomenon  than
before. But though we have not as yet grasped it, we have brought ourselves
to a point where we can bring it into view.

In conspicuousness, obtrusiveness, and obstinacy, that which is ready-to-
hand loses its readiness-to-hand in a certain way. But in our dealings with
what  is  ready-to-hand,  this  readiness-to-hand  is  itself  understood,  though
not thematically. It does not vanish simply, but takes its farewell, as it were,
in the conspicuousness of the unusable. Readiness-to-hand still shows itself,
and  it  is  precisely  here  that  the  worldly  character  of  the  ready-to-hand
shows itself too.

The  structure  of  the  Being  of  what  is  ready-to-hand  as  equipment  is
determined by references or assignments. In a peculiar and obvious manner,
the  ‘Things’  which  are  closest  to  us  are  ‘in  themselves’  [“Ansich”];  and
they are encountered as ‘in themselves’ in the concern which makes use of
them  without  noticing  them  explicitly—the  concern  which  can  come  up
against something unusable. When equipment cannot be used, this implies
that the constitutive assignment of the “in-order-to” to a “towards-this” has
been  disturbed.  The  assignments  themselves  are  not  observed;  they  are

rather ‘there’  when  we  concernfully submit  ourselves to  them [Sichstellen
unter sie]. But when an assignment has been disturbed—when something is
unusable  for  some  purpose—then  the  assignment  becomes  explicit.  Even
now, of course, it has not become explicit as an ontological structure; but it
has  become  explicit  ontically  for  the  circumspection  which  comes  up
against  the  damaging  of  the  tool.  When  an  assignment  to  some  particular
“towards-this”  has  been  thus  circumspectively  aroused,  we  catch  sight  of
the  “towards-this”  itself,  and  along  with  it  everything  connected  with  the
work—the  whole  ‘work-shop’—as  that  wherein  concern  always  dwells.
The context of equipment is lit up, not as something never seen before, but
as  a  totality  constantly  sighted  beforehand  in  circumspection.  With  this
totality, however, the world announces itself.

H. 75

 

Similarly,  when  something  ready-to-hand  is  found  missing,  though  its
everyday  presence [Zugegensein]  has been so obvious  that we  have never
taken any notice of it, this makes a break in those referential contexts which
circumspection discovers. Our circumspection comes up against emptiness,
and now sees for the first time what the missing article was ready-to-hand
with, and what it was ready-to-hand for. The environment announces  itself
afresh. What is thus lit up is not itself just one thing ready-to-hand among
others;  still  less  is  it  something  present-at-hand  upon  which  equipment
ready-to-hand  is  somehow  founded:  it  is  in  the  ‘there’  before  anyone  has
observed or ascertained it. It is itself inaccessible to circumspection, so far
as circumspection is always directed towards entities; but in each case it has
already  been  disclosed  for  circumspection.  ‘Disclose’  and  ‘disclosedness’
will be used as technical terms in the passages that follow, and shall signify
‘to  lay  open’  and  ‘the  character  of  having  been  laid  open.’  Thus  ‘to
disclose’ never means anything like ‘to obtain indirectly by inference’.(1)
 

1. In ordinary German usage, the verb ‘erschliessen’ may mean not only to ‘disclose’ but also—
in certain constructions—to ‘infer’ or ‘conclude’ in the sense in which one ‘infers’ a conclusion from
premisses.  Heidegger  is  deliberately  ruling  out  this  latter  interpretation,  though  on  a  very  few
occasions  he  may  use  the  word  in  this  sense.  He  explains  his  own  meaning  by  the  cognate  verb
‘aufschliessen’,  to  ‘lay  open’.  To  say  that  something  has  been  ‘disclosed’  or  ‘laid  open’  in
Heidegger’s sense, does not mean that one has any detailed awareness of the contents which are thus
‘disclosed’, but rather that they have been ‘laid open’ to us as implicit in what is given, so that they

may be made explicit to our awareness by further analysis or discrimination of the given, rather than
by any inference from it.

That the world does not ‘consist’ of the ready-to-hand shows itself in the
fact  (among  others)  that  whenever  the  world  is  lit  up  in  the  modes  of
concern  which  we  have  been  Interpreting,  the  ready-to-hand  becomes
deprived  of  its  worldhood  so  that  Being-just-present-at-hand  comes  to  the
fore. If, in our everyday concern with the ‘environment’, it is to be possible
for  equipment  ready-to-hand  to  be  encountered  in  its  ‘Being-in-itself’  [in
seinem “An-sich-sein”], then those assignments and referential totalities in
which  our  circumspection  ‘is  absorbed’  cannot  become  a  theme  for  that
circumspection  any  more  than  they  can  for  grasping  things  ‘thematically’
but non-circumspectively. If it is to be possible for the ready-to-hand not to
emerge from its inconspicuousness, the world must not announce itself. And
it is in this that the Being-in-itself of entities which are ready-to-hand has its
phenomenal structure constituted.

H. 76

 

In 

as 

such 

privative 

the  present-at-hand  as 

“inconspicuousness”,
expressions 
“unobtrusiveness”, and “non-obstinacy”, what we have in view is a positive
phenomenal  character  of  the  Being  of  that  which  is  proximally  ready-to-
hand.  With  these  negative  prefixes  we  have  in  view  the  character  of  the
ready-to-hand as “holding itself in”; this is what we have our eye upon in
the “Being-in-itself” of something,(1) though ‘proximally’ we ascribe it to
the  present-at-hand—to 
that  which  can  be
thematically ascertained. As long as we take our orientation primarily and
exclusively  from  the  present-at-hand,  the  ‘in-itself’  can  by  no  means  be
ontologically  clarified.  If,  however,  this  talk  about  the  ‘in-itself’  has  any
ontological  importance,  some  interpretation  must  be  called  for.  This  “in-
itself”  of  Being  is  something  which  gets  invoked  with  considerable
emphasis,  mostly  in  an  ontical  way,  and  rightly  so  from  a  phenomenal
standpoint. But if some ontological assertion is supposed to be given when
this is ontically invoked, its claims are not fulfilled by such a procedure. As
the  foregoing  analysis  has  already  made  clear,  only  on  the  basis  of  the
phenomenon  of  the  world  can  the  Being-in-itself  of  entities  within-the-
world be grasped ontologically.

 

 

1. ‘Diese “Un” meinen den Charakter des Ansichhaltens des Zuhandenen, das, was wir mit dem
An-sieh-sein im Auge haben...’ The point seems to be that when we speak of something ‘as it is “in
itself”  or  “in  its  own  right”  ’,we  think  of  it  as  ‘holding  itself  in’  or  ‘holding  itself  back’—not
‘stepping forth’ or doing something ‘out of character’.

But if the world can, in a way, be lit up, it must assuredly be disclosed.
And  it  has  already  been  disclosed  beforehand  whenever  what  is  ready-to-
hand within-the-world is accessible for circumspective concern. The world
is therefore something ‘wherein’ Dasein as an entity already was, and if in
any manner it explicitly comes away from anything, it can never do more
than come back to the world.

Being-in-the-world, according to our Interpretation hitherto, amounts to
a  non-thematic  circumspective  absorption  in  references  or  assignments
constitutive  for  the  readiness-to-hand  of  a  totality  of  equipment.  Any
concern  is  already  as  it  is,  because  of  some  familiarity  with  the  world.  In
this familiarity Dasein can lose itself in what it encounters within-the-world
and be fascinated with it. What is it that Dasein is familiar with? Why can
the worldly character of what is within-the-world be lit up? The presence-
at-hand(1)  of  entities  is  thrust  to  the  fore  by  the  possible  breaks  in  that
referential totality in which circumspection ‘operates’; how are we to get a
closer understanding of this totality?

These questions are aimed at working out both the phenomenon and the
problems  of  worldhood,  and 
the
interconnections with which certain structures are built up. To answer them
we must analyse these structures more concretely.

they  call  for  an 

inquiry 

into 

17. Reference and Signs

In our provisional Interpretation of that structure of Being which belongs
to  the  ready-to-hand  (to  ‘equipment’),  the  phenomenon  of  reference  or
assignment became visible; but we merely gave an indication of it, and in
so  sketchy  a  form  that  we  at  once  stressed  the  necessity  of  uncovering  it
with  regard  to  its  ontological  origin.(2)  It  became  plain,  moreover,  that
assignments  and  referential  totalities  could  in  some  sense  become
constitutive  for  worldhood  itself.  Hitherto  we  have  seen  the  world  lit  up
only  in  and  for  certain  definite  ways  in  which  we  concern  ourselves

environmentally with the ready-to-hand, and indeed it has been lit up only
with  the  readiness-to-hand  of  that  concern.  So  the  further  we  proceed  in
understanding the Being of entities within-the-world, the broader and firmer
becomes  the  phenomenal  basis  on  which  the  world-phenomenon  may  be
laid bare.
 

1. Here the older editions have ‘Zuhandenheit’ where the newer ones have ‘Vorhandenheit’.
2. Cf. H. 68 above.

H. 77

 

We shall again take as our point of departure the Being of the ready-to-
hand,  but  this  time  with  the  purpose  of  grasping  the  phenomenon  of
reference or assignment itself more precisely. We shall accordingly attempt
an  ontological  analysis  of  a  kind  of  equipment  in  which  one  may  come
across  such  ‘references’  in  more  senses  than  one.  We  come  across
‘equipment’ in signs. The word “sign” designates many kinds of things: not
only may it stand for different kinds of signs, but Being-a-sign-for can itself
be formalized as a universal kind of relation, so that the sign-structure itself
provides an ontological clue for ‘characterizing’ any entity whatsoever.

But signs, in the first instance, are themselves items of equipment whose
specific  character  as  equipment  consists  in  showing  or  indicating.(1)  We
find  such  signs  in  signposts,  boundary-stones,  the  ball  for  the  mariner’s
storm-warning, signals, banners, signs of mourning, and the like. Indicating
can be defined as a ‘kind’ of referring. Referring is, if we take it as formally
as possible, a relating. But relation does not function as a genus for ‘kinds’
or  ‘species’  of  references  which  may  somehow  become  differentiated  as
sign,  symbol,  expression,  or  signification.  A  relation  is  something  quite
formal which may be read off directly by way of ‘formalization’ from any
kind of context, whatever its subject-matter or its way of Being.(ii)

Every reference is a relation, but not every relation is a reference. Every
‘indication’  is  a  reference,  but  not  every  referring  is  an  indicating.  This
implies at the same time that every ‘indication’ is a relation, but not every
relation is an indicating. The formally general character of relation is thus
brought  to  light.  If  we  are  to  investigate  such  phenomena  as  references,
signs, or even significations, nothing is to be gained by characterizing them
as  relations.  Indeed  we  shall  eventually  have  to  show  that  ‘relations’

themselves,  because  of  their  formally  general  character,  have  their
ontological source in a reference.
 

ii. Cf. E. Husserl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie,
I. Teil, this Yearbook [Jahrbuch für Philosophie und Phänomenologische Forschung] vol. I, Section
10  ff.,  as  well  as  his  Logische  Untersuchungen,  vol.  I,  Ch.  II.  For  the  analysis  of  signs  and
signification see ibid., vol. II, I, Ch. I.
 

1. ‘…deren spezifischer Zeugcharakter im Zeigen besteht.’ While we have often used ‘show’ and
‘indicate’ to translate ‘zeigen’ and ‘anzeigen’ respectively, in the remainder of this section it seems
more  appropriate  to  translate  ‘zeigen’  by  ‘indicate’,  or  to  resort  to  hendiadys  as  in  the  present
passage.

H. 78

 

If the present analysis is to be confined to the Interpretation of the sign
as  distinct  from  the  phenomenon  of  reference,  then  even  within  this
limitation  we  cannot  properly  investigate  the  full  multiplicity  of  possible
signs. Among signs there are symptoms [Anzeichen], warning signals, signs
of  things  that  have  happened  already  [Rückzeichen],  signs  to  mark
something, signs by which things are recognized; these have different ways
of indicating, regardless of what may be serving as such a sign. From such
‘signs’  we  must  distinguish  traces,  residues,  commemorative  monuments,
documents,  testimony,  symbols,  expressions,  appearances,  significations.
These  phenomena  can  easily  be  formalized  because  of  their  formal
relational character; we find it especially tempting nowadays to take such a
‘relation’ as a clue for subjecting every entity to a kind of ‘Interpretation’
which  always  ‘fits’  because  at  bottom  it  says  nothing,  no  more  than  the
facile schema of content and form.

As an example of a sign we have chosen one which we shall use again in
a later analysis, though in another regard. Motor cars are sometimes fitted
up with an adjustable red arrow, whose position indicates the direction the
vehicle will take—at an intersection, for instance. The position of the arrow
is  controlled  by  the  driver.  This  sign  is  an  item  of  equipment  which  is
ready-to-hand  for  the  driver  in  his  concern  with  driving,  and  not  for  him
alone: those who are not travelling with him—and they in particular—also
make use of it, either by giving way on the proper side or by stopping. This
sign  is  ready-to-hand  within-the-world  in  the  whole  equipment-context  of
vehicles  and  traffic  regulations.  It  is  equipment  for  indicating,  and  as

equipment, it is constituted by reference or assignment. It has the character
of  the  “in-order-to”,  its  own  definite  serviceability;  it  is  for  indicating.(1)
This  indicating  which  the  sign  performs  can  be  taken  as  a  kind  of
‘referring’. But here we must notice that this ‘referring’ as indicating is not
the ontological structure of the sign as equipment.
 

1. ‘Es hat den Charakter des Um-zu, seine bestimmte Dienlichkeit, es ist zum Zeigen.’ The verb
‘dienen’, is often followed by an infinitive construction introduced by the preposition ‘zu’. Similarly
the English ‘serve’ can be followed by an infinitive in such expressions as ‘it serves to indicate...’ In
Heidegger’s  German  the  ‘zu’  construction  is  carried  over  to  the  noun  ‘Dienlichkeit’;  the
corresponding noun ‘serviceability’, however, is not normally followed by an infinitive, but rather by
an expression introduced by ‘for’ e.g. ‘serviceability for indicating...’ Since the preposition ‘zu’ plays
an important role in this section and the next, it would be desirable to provide a uniform translation
for  it.  We  shall,  however,  translate  it  as  ‘for’  in  such  expressions  as  ‘Dienlichkeit  zu’,  but  as
‘towards’ in such expressions as ‘Wozu’ (‘towards-which’) and ‘Dazu’ (‘towards-this’), retaining ‘in-
order-to’ for ‘Um-zu’.

H. 79

 

Instead,  ‘referring’  as  indicating  is  grounded  in  the  Being-structure  of
equipment,  in  serviceability  for...  But  an  entity  may  have  serviceability
without  thereby  becoming  a  sign.  As  equipment,  a  ‘hammer’  too  is
constituted by a serviceability, but this does not make it a sign. Indicating,
as a ‘reference’, is a way in which the “towards-which” of a serviceability
becomes  ontically  concrete;  it  determines  an  item  of  equipment  as    f  o  r
  this  “towards-which”  [und  bestimmt  ein  Zeug  zu  diesem].  On  the  other
hand, the kind of reference we get in ‘serviceability-for’, is an ontologico-
categorial  attribute  of  equipment  as  equipment.  That  the  “towards-which”
of serviceability should acquire its concreteness in indicating, is an accident
of  its  equipment-constitution  as  such.  In  this  example  of  a  sign,  the
difference  between  the  reference  of  serviceability  and  the  reference  of
indicating  becomes  visible  in  a  rough  and  ready  fashion.  These  are  so  far
from coinciding that only when they are united does the concreteness of a
definite  kind  of  equipment  become  possible.  Now  it  is  certain  that
indicating  differs  in  principle  from  reference  as  a  constitutive  state  of
equipment; it is just as incontestable that the sign in its turn is related in a
peculiar  and  even  distinctive  way  to  the  kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to
whatever  equipmental  totality  may  be  ready-to-hand  in  the  environment,
and  to  its  worldly  character.  In  our  concernful  dealings,  equipment  for
indicating  [Zeig-zeug]  gets  used  in  a  very  special  way.  But  simply  to

establish this Fact is ontologically insufficient. The basis and the meaning
of this special status must be clarified.

What do we mean when we say that a sign “indicates”? We can answer
this only by determining what kind of dealing is appropriate with equipment
for indicating. And we must do this in such a way that the readiness-to-hand
of that equipment can be genuinely grasped. What is the appropriate way of
having-to-do with signs? Going back to our example of the arrow, we must
say  that  the  kind  of  behaving  (Being)  which  corresponds  to  the  sign  we
encounter, is either to ‘give way’ or to ‘stand still’ vis-à-vis the car with the
arrow.  Giving  way,  as  taking  a  direction,  belongs  essentially  to  Dasein’s
Being-in-the-world. Dasein is always somehow directed [ausgerichtet] and
on its way; standing and waiting are only limiting cases of this directional
‘on-its-way’.  The  sign  addresses  itself  to  a  Being-in-the-world  which  is
specifically  ‘spatial’.  The  sign  is  not  authentically  ‘grasped’  [“erfasst”]  if
we just stare at it and identify it as an indicator-Thing which occurs. Even if
we turn our glance in the direction which the arrow indicates, and look at
something present-at-hand in the region indicated, even then the sign is not
the
authentically  encountered.  Such  a 
circumspection of our concernful dealings, and it does so in such a way that
the  circumspection  which  goes  along  with  it,  following  where  it  points,
brings into an explicit ‘survey’ whatever aroundness the environment may
have at  the  time. This  circumspective  survey  does not grasp  the  ready-to-
hand;  what  it  achieves  is  rather  an  orientation  within  our  environment.
There is also another way in which we can experience equipment: we may
encounter the arrow simply as equipment which belongs to the car. We can
do this without discovering what character it specifically has as equipment:
what the arrow is to indicate and how it is to do so, may remain completely
undetermined;  yet  what  we  are  encountering  is  not  a  mere  Thing.  The
experiencing  of  a  Thing  requires  a  definiteness  of  its  own  [ihre  eigene
Bestimmtheit],  and  must  be  contrasted  with  coming  across  a  manifold  of
equipment,  which  may  often  be  quite  indefinite,  even  when  one  comes
across it as especially close.

sign  addresses 

itself 

to 

H. 80

 

Signs  of  the  kind  we  have  described  let  what  is  ready-to-hand  be
encountered; more precisely, they let some context of it become accessible

in such a way that our concernful dealings take on an orientation and hold it
secure.  A  sign  is  not  a  Thing  which  stands  to  another  Thing  in  the
relationship of indicating; it is rather an item of equipment which explicitly
raises a totality of equipment into our circumspection so that together with
it  the  worldly  character  of  the  ready-to-hand  announces  itself.  In  a
symptom or a warning-signal, ‘what is coming’ ‘indicates itself’, but not in
the  sense  of  something  merely  occurring,  which  comes  as  an  addition  to
what is already present-at-hand; ‘what is coming’ is the sort of thing which
we are ready for, or which we ‘weren’t ready for’ if we have been attending
to something else.(1) In signs of something that has happened already, what
has come to pass and run its course becomes circumspectively accessible. A
sign to mark something indicates what one is ‘at’ at any time. Signs always
indicate  primarily  ‘wherein’  one  lives,  where  one’s  concern  dwells,  what
sort of involvement there is with something.(2)

The peculiar character of signs as equipment becomes especially clear in
‘establishing  a  sign’  [“Zeichenstiftung”].  This  activity  is  performed  in  a
circumspective  fore-sight  [Vorsicht]  out  of  which  it  arises,  and  which
requires  that  it  be  possible  for  one’s  particular  environment  to  announce
itself for circumspection at any time by means of something ready-to-hand,
and  that  this  possibility  should  itself  be  ready-to-hand.  But  the  Being  of
what is most closely ready-to-hand within-the-world possesses the character
of  holding-itself-in  and  not  emerging,  which  we  have  described  above.(3)
Accordingly our circumspective  dealings  in  the  environment require some
equipment ready-to-hand which in its character as equipment takes over the
‘work’  of  letting  something  ready-to-hand  become  conspicuous.  So  when
such equipment (signs) gets produced, its conspicuousness must be kept in
mind. But even when signs are thus conspicuous, one does not let them be
present-at-hand  at  random;  they  get  ‘set  up’  [“angebracht”]  in  a  definite
way with a view towards easy accessibility.
 

1. ‘…das “was kommt” ist solches, darauf wir uns gefasst machen, bzw. “nicht gefasst waren”,

sofern wir uns mit anderem befassten.’

2.  ‘Das  Merkzeichen  zeigt,  “woran”  man  jeweils  ist.  Die  Zeichen  zeigen  prirmär  immer  das,
“worin”  man  lebt,  wobei  das  Besorgen  sich  aufhält,  welche  Bewandtnis  es  damit  hat.’  On
‘Bewandtnis’, see note 2, H. 84 below.

3. See H. 75-76 above.

In establishing a sign, however, one does not necessarily have to produce
equipment which is not yet ready-to-hand at all. Signs also arise when one

takes  as  a  sign  [Zum-Zeichen-nehmen]  something  that  is  ready-to-hand
already. In this mode, signs “get established” in a sense which is even more
primordial. In indicating, a ready-to-hand equipment totality, and even the
environment  in  general,  can  be  provided  with  an  availability  which  is
circumspectively oriented; and not only this: establishing a sign can, above
all,  reveal.  What  gets  taken  as  a  sign  becomes  accessible  only  through  its
readiness-to-hand. If, for instance, the south wind ‘is accepted’ [“gilt”] by
the  farmer  as  a  sign  of  rain,  then  this  ‘acceptance’  [“Geltung”]—or  the
‘value’ with which the entity is ‘invested’—is not a sort of bonus over and
above  what  is  already  present-at-hand  in  itself—viz,  the  flow  of  air  in  a
definite  geographical  direction.  The  south  wind  may  be  meteorologically
accessible  as  something  which  just  occurs;  but  it  is  never  present-at-hand
proximally in such a way as this, only occasionally taking over the function
of a warning signal. On the contrary, only by the circumspection with which
one takes account of things in farming, is the south wind discovered in its
Being.

H. 81

 

But,  one  will  protest,  that  which  gets  taken  as  a  sign  must  first  have
become  accessible  in  itself  and  been  apprehended  before  the  sign  gets
established. Certainly it must in any case be such that in some way we can
come  across  it.  The  question  simply  remains  as  to  how  entities  are
discovered  in  this  previous  encountering,  whether  as  mere  Things  which
occur, or rather as equipment which has not been understood—as something
ready-to-hand with which we have hitherto not known ‘how to begin’, and
the  purview  of
which  has  accordingly  kept 
circumspection.  And  here  again,  when  the  equipmental  characters  of  the
ready-to-hand  are  still  circumspectively  undiscovered,  they  are  not  to  be
Interpreted as bare Thinghood presented for an apprehension of what is just
present-at-hand and no more.

itself  veiled 

from 

The  Being-ready-to-hand  of  signs  in  our  everyday  dealings,  and  the
conspicuousness  which  belongs  to  signs  and  which  may  be  produced  for
various purposes and in various ways, do not merely serve to document the
inconspicuousness constitutive for what is most closely ready-to-hand; the
sign  itself  gets  its  conspicuousness  from  the  inconspicuousness  of  the
its
equipmental 

is  ready-to-hand  and  ‘obvious’ 

totality,  which 

in 

everydayness.  The  knot  which  one  ties  in  a  handkerchief  [der  bekannte
“Knopf im Taschentuch”] as a sign to mark something is an example of this.
What such a sign is to indicate is always something with which one has to
concern oneself in one’s everyday circumspection. Such a sign can indicate
many things, and things of the most various kinds. The wider the extent to
which it can indicate, the narrower its intelligibility and its usefulness. Not
only is it, for the most part, ready-to-hand as a sign only for the person who
‘establishes’ it, but it can even become inaccessible to him, so that another
sign is needed if the first is to be used circumspectively at all. So when the
knot  cannot  be  used  as  a  sign,  it  does  not  lose  its  sign-character,  but  it
acquires  the  disturbing  obtrusiveness  of  something  most  closely  ready-to-
hand.

H. 82

 

One  might  be  tempted  to  cite  the  abundant  use  of  ‘signs’  in  primitive
Dasein,  as  in  fetishism  and  magic,  to  illustrate  the  remarkable  role  which
they  play  in  everyday  concern  when  it  comes  to  our  understanding  of  the
world.  Certainly  the  establishment  of  signs  which  underlies  this  way  of
using  them  is  not  performed  with  any  theoretical  aim  or  in  the  course  of
theoretical speculation. This way of using them always remains completely
within a Being-in-the-world which is ‘immediate’. But on closer inspection
it  becomes  plain  that  to  interpret  fetishism  and  magic  by  taking  our  clue
from  the  idea  of  signs  in  general,  is  not  enough  to  enable  us  to  grasp  the
kind of ‘Being-ready-to-hand’ which belongs to entities encountered in the
primitive  world.  With  regard  to  the  sign-phenomenon,  the  following
Interpretation may be given: for primitive man, the sign coincides with that
which  is  indicated.  Not  only  can  the  sign  represent  this  in  the  sense  of
serving as a substitute for what it indicates, but it can do so in such a way
that the  sign  itself always is  what  it  indicates.  This  remarkable  coinciding
does  not  mean,  however,  that  the  sign-Thing  has  already  undergone  a
certain ‘Objectification’—that it has been experienced as a mere Thing and
misplaced  into  the  same  realm  of  Being  of  the  present-at-hand  as  what  it
indicates.  This  ‘coinciding’  is  not  an  identification  of  things  which  have
hitherto been isolated from each other: it consists rather in the fact that the
sign has not as yet become free from that of which it is a sign. Such a use of
signs  is  still  absorbed  completely  in  Being-towards  what  is  indicated,  so

that a sign as such cannot detach itself at all. This coinciding is based not on
a  prior  Objectification  but  on  the  fact  that  such  Objectification  is
completely lacking. This means, however, that signs are not discovered as
equipment at all—that ultimately what is ‘ready-to-hand’ within-the-world
just  does  not  have  the  kind  of  Being  that  belongs  to  equipment.  Perhaps
even  readiness-to-hand  and  equipment  have  nothing  to  contribute  [nichts
auszurichten]  as  ontological  clues  in  Interpreting  the  primitive  world;  and
certainly the ontology of Thinghood does even less. But if an understanding
of Being is constitutive for primitive Dasein and for the primitive world in
general,  then  it  is  all  the  more  urgent  to  work  out  the  ‘formal’  idea  of
worldhood—or at least the idea of a phenomenon modifiable in such a way
that  all  ontological  assertions  to  the  effect  that  in  a  given  phenomenal
context  something  is  not  yet  such-and-such  or  no  longer  such-and-such,
may acquire a positive phenomenal meaning in terms of what it is not.(1)
 

1. ‘…aus dem, was es nicht ist.’ The older editions write ‘w a s’ for ‘was’.

The  foregoing  Interpretation  of  the  sign  should  merely  provide
phenomenal  support  for  our  characterization  of  references  or  assignments.
The relation between sign and reference is threefold. 1. Indicating, as a way
whereby  the  “towards-which”  of  a  serviceability  can  become  concrete,  is
founded  upon  the  equipment-structure  as  such,  upon  the  “in-order-to”
(assignment).  2.  The  indicating  which  the  sign  does  is  an  equipmental
character of something ready-to-hand, and as such it belongs to a totality of
equipment, to a context of assignments or references. 3. The sign is not only
ready-to-hand  with  other  equipment,  but  in  its  readiness-to-hand  the
environment becomes in each case explicitly accessible for circumspection.
A  sign  is  something  ontically  ready-to-hand,  which  functions  both  as  this
definite  equipment  and  as  something  indicative  of  [was…  anzeigt]  the
ontological  structure  of  readiness-to-hand,  of  referential  totalities,  and  of
worldhood. Here is rooted the special status of the sign as something ready-
to-hand 
that  environment  with  which  we  concern  ourselves
circumspectively.  Thus  the  reference  or  the  assignment  itself  cannot  be
conceived  as  a  sign  if  it  is  to  serve  ontologically  as  the  foundation  upon
which  signs  are  based.  Reference  is  not  an  ontical  characteristic  of
something ready-to-hand, when it is rather that by which readiness-to-hand
itself is constituted.

in 

In  what  sense,  then,  is  reference  ‘presupposed’  ontologically  in  the
ready-to-hand, and to what extent is it, as such an ontological foundation, at
the same time constitutive for worldhood in general?

18. Involvement and Significance; the Worldhood of the World

The  ready-to-hand  is  encountered  within-the-world.  The  Being  of  this
entity,  readiness-to-hand,  thus  stands  in  some  ontological  relationship
towards  the  world  and  towards  worldhood.  In  anything  ready-to-hand  the
world  is  always  ‘there’.  Whenever  we  encounter  anything,  the  world  has
already been previously discovered, though not thematically. But it can also
be lit up in certain ways of dealing with our environment. The world is that
in terms of which the ready-to-hand is ready-to-hand. How can the world let
the  ready-to-hand  be  encountered?  Our  analysis  hitherto  has  shown  that
what  we  encounter  within-the-world  has,  in  its  very  Being,  been  freed(1)
for  our  concernful  circumspection,  for  taking  account.  What  does  this
previous  freeing  amount  to,  and  how  is  this  to  be  understood  as  an
ontologically  distinctive  feature  of  the  world?  What  problems  does  the
question of the worldhood of the world lay before us?
 

1. ‘freigegeben’. The idea seems to be that what we encounter has, as it were, been released, set

free, given its freedom, or given free rein, so that our circumspection can take account of it.

H. 83

H. 84

 

 

 

We  have  indicated  that  the  state  which  is  constitutive  for  the  ready-to-
hand as equipment is one of reference or assignment. How can entities with
this kind of Being be freed by the world with regard to their Being? Why
are these the first entities to be encountered? As definite kinds of references
we  have  mentioned  serviceability-for-,  detrimentality  [Abträglichkeit],
usability, and the like. The “towards-which” [das Wozu] of a serviceability
and the “for-which” [das Wofür] of a usability prescribed the ways in which
such a reference or assignment can become concrete. But the ‘indicating’ of
the sign and the ‘hammering’ of the hammer are not properties of entities.

Indeed, they are not properties at all, if the ontological structure designated
by the term ‘property’ is that of some definite character which it is possible
for  Things  to  possess  [einer  möglichen  Bestimmtheit  von  Dingen].
Anything ready-to-hand is, at the worst, appropriate for some purposes and
inappropriate for others; and its ‘properties’ are, as it were, still bound up in
these ways in which it is appropriate or inappropriate,(1) just as presence-
at-hand, as a possible kind of Being for something ready-to-hand, is bound
up in readiness-to-hand. Serviceability too, however, as a constitutive state
of equipment (and serviceability is a reference), is not an appropriateness of
some entity; it is rather the condition (so far as Being is in question) which
makes  it  possible  for  the  character  of  such  an  entity  to  be  defined  by  its
appropriatenesses. But what, then, is “reference” or “assignment” to mean?
To say that the Being of the ready-to-hand has the structure of assignment
or reference means that it has in itself the character of having been assigned
or  referred  [Verwiesenheit].  An  entity  is  discovered  when  it  has  been
assigned  or  referred  to  something,  and  referred  as  that  entity  which  it  is.
With any such entity there is an involvement which it has in something.(2)
The character of Being which belongs to the ready-to-hand is just such an
involvement.  If  something  has  an  involvement,  this  implies  letting  it  be
involved  in  something.  The  relationship  of  the  “with...  in…”  shall  be
indicated by the term “assignment” or “reference”.(3)
 

1. The words ‘property’ and ‘appropriateness’ reflect the etymological connection of Heidegger’s

‘Eigenschaft’ and “Geeignetheit’.

2.  ‘Es  hat  mit  ihm  bei  etwas  sein  Bewenden.’  The  terms  ‘Bewenden’  and  ‘Bewandtnis’  are
among the most difficult for the translator. Their root meaning has to do with the way something is
already ‘turning’ when one lets it ‘go its own way’, ‘run its course’, follow its ‘bent’ or ‘tendency’,
or  finish  ‘what  it  is  about’,  ‘what  it  is  up  to’  or  ‘what  it  is  involved  in’.  The  German  expressions,
however, have no simple English equivalents, but are restricted to a rather special group of idioms
such  as  the  following,  which  we  have  taken  from  Wildhagen  and  Héraucourt’s  admirable  English-
German, German-English Dictionary (Volume II, Wiesbaden 1953): ‘es dabei bewenden lassen’—‘to
leave it at that, to let it go at that, to let it rest there’; ‘und dabei hatte es sein Bewenden’—‘and there
the matter ended’; ‘dabei muss es sein Bewenden haben’—‘there the matter must rest’—‘that must
suffice’;  ‘die  Sache  hat  eine  ganz  andere  Bewandtnis’—‘the  case  is  quite  different’;  ‘damit  hat  es
seine besondere Bewandtnis’—‘there is something peculiar about it; thereby hangs a tale’; ‘damit hat
est folgende Bewandtnis’—‘the matter is as follows’.

We  have  tried  to  render  both  ‘Bewenden’  and  ‘Bewandtnis’  by  expressions  including  either
‘involve’ or ‘involvement’. But the contexts into which these words can easily be fitted in ordinary
English do not correspond very well to those which are possible for ‘Bewenden’ and ‘Bewandtnis’.
Our task is further complicated by the emphasis which Heidegger gives to the prepositions ‘mit’ and
‘bei’ in connection with ‘Bewenden’ and ‘Bewandtnis’. In passages such as the present one, it would
be  more  idiomatic  to  leave  these  prepositions  untranslated  and  simply  write:  ‘Any  such  entity  is
involved in doing something’, or ‘Any such entity is involved in some activity’. But ‘mit’ and ‘bei’

receive so much attention in this connection that in contexts such as this we shall sometimes translate
them  as  ‘with’  and  ‘in’,  though  elsewhere  we  shall  handle  ‘bei’  very  differently.  (The  reader  must
bear  in  mind  that  the  kind  of  ‘involvement’  with  which  we  are  here  concerned  is  always  an
involvement of equipment in ‘what it is up to’ or what it is ‘doing’, not a person’s involvement in
circumstances in which he is ‘caught’ or ‘entangled’.

3. ‘In Bewandtnis liegt: bewenden lassen mit etwas bei etwas. Der Bezug des “mit… bei...” soll
durch den Terminus Verweisung angezeigt werden.’ Here the point seems to be that if something has
an ‘involvement’ in the sense of ‘Bewandtnis’ (or rather, if there is such an involvement ‘with’ it),
the  thing  which  has  this  involvement  has  been  ‘assigned’  or  ‘referred’  for  a  certain  activity  or
purpose ‘in’ which it may be said to be involved.

When an entity within-the-world  has already been proximally  freed  for
its Being, that Being is its “involvement”.  W i t h  any such entity as entity,
there  is  some  involvement.  The  fact  that  it  has  such  an  involvement  is
ontologically definitive for the Being of such an entity, and is not an ontical
assertion  about  it.  That  in  which  it  is  involved  is  the  “towards-which”  of
serviceability,  and  the  “for-which”  of  usability.(1)  With  the  “towards-
which” of serviceability there can again be an involvement: with this thing,
for  instance,  which  is  ready-to-hand,  and  which  we  accordingly  call  a
“hammer”, there is an involvement in hammering; with hammering, there is
an  involvement  in  making  something  fast;  with  making  something  fast,
there  is  an  involvement  in  protection  against  bad  weather;  and  this
protection  ‘is’  for  the  sake  of  [um-willen]  providing  shelter  for  Dasein—
that  is  to  say,  for  the  sake  of  a  possibility  of  Dasein’s  Being.  Whenever
something ready-to-hand has an involvement with it, what involvement this
is, has in each case been outlined in advance in terms of the totality of such
involvements.  In  a  workshop,  for  example,  the  totality  of  involvements
which  is  constitutive  for  the  ready-to-hand  in  its  readiness-to-hand,  is
‘earlier’ than any single item of equipment; so too for the farmstead with all
its utensils and outlying lands. But the totality of involvements itself goes
back  ultimately  to  a  “towards-which”  in  which  there  is  no  further
involvement: this “towards-which” is not an entity with the kind of Being
that belongs to what is ready-to-hand within a world; it is rather an entity
whose Being is defined as Being-in-the-world, and to whose state of Being,
worldhood itself belongs. This primary “towards-which” is not just another
“towards-this”  as  something  in  which  an  involvement  is  possible.  The
primary  ‘towards-which’  is  a  “for-the-sake-of-which”.(2)  But  the  ‘for-the-
sake-of’  always  pertains  to  the  Being  of  Dasein,  for  which,  in  its  Being,
that  very  Being  is  essentially  an  issue.  We  have  thus  indicated  the
interconnection by which the structure of an involvement leads to Dasein’s

very  Being  as  the  sole  authentic  “for-the-sake-of-which”;  for  the  present,
however,  we  shall  pursue  this  no  further.  ‘Letting  something  be  involved’
must  first  be  clarified  enough  to  give  the  phenomenon  of  worldhood  the
kind  of  definiteness  which  makes  it  possible  to  formulate  any  problems
about it.
 

1.  ‘Bewandtnis  ist  das  Sein  des  innerweltlichen  Seienden,  darauf  es  je  schon  zunächst
freigegeben ist. Mit ihm als Seiendem hat es je eine Bewandtnis. Dieses, dass es eine Bewandtnis hat,
ist die ontologische  Bestimmung  des  Seins  dieses  Seienden,  nicht  eine  ontische  Aussage  über  das
Seiende.  Das  Wobei  es  die  Bewandtnis  hat,  ist  das  Wozu  der  Dienlichkeit,  das  Wofür  der
Verwendbarkeit.’  This  passage  and  those  which  follow  are  hard  to  translate  because  Heidegger  is
using  three  carefully  differentiated  prepositions  (‘zu’,  ‘für’,  and  ‘auf’)  where  English  idiom  needs
only ‘for’. We can say that something is serviceable, usable, or applicable ‘for’ a purpose and that it
may be freed or given free rein ‘for’ some kind of activity. In German, however, it will be said to
have ‘Dienlichkeit zu...’, ‘Verwendbarkeit für...’, and it will be ‘freigegeben auf...’. In the remainder
of this section we shall use ‘for’ both for ‘für’ and for ‘auf’ as they occur in these expressions; we
shall, however, continue to use ‘towards-which’ for the ‘Wozu’ of ‘Dienlichkeit’. See note 1, H. 78
above.

2.  ‘Dieses  primäre  Wozu  ist  kein  Dazu  als  mögliches  Wobei  einer  Bewandtnis.  Das  primäre

“Wozu’ ist ein Worum-willen.’

H. 85

 

Ontically,  “letting  something  be  involved”  signifies  that  within  our
factical  concern  we  let  something  ready-to-hand  be  so-and-so  as  it  is
already and in order that it be such.(1) The way we take this ontical sense
of  ‘letting  be’  is,  in  principle,  ontological.  And  therewith  we  Interpret  the
meaning of previously freeing what is proximally ready-to-hand within-the-
world. Previously letting something ‘be’ does not mean that we must first
bring it into its Being and produce it; it means rather that something which
is already an ‘entity’ must be discovered in its readiness-to-hand, and that
we  must  thus  let  the  entity  which  has  this  Being  be  encountered.  This  ‘a
priori’ letting-something-be-involved is the condition for the possibility of
encountering anything ready-to-hand, so that Dasein, in its ontical dealings
with the entity thus encountered, can thereby let it be involved in the ontical
sense.(2) On the other hand, if letting something be involved is understood
ontologically,  what  is  then  pertinent  is  the  freeing  of  everything  ready-to-
hand  as  ready-to-hand,  no  matter  whether,  taken  ontically,  it  is  involved
thereby,  or  whether  it  is  rather  an  entity  of  precisely  such  a  sort  that
ontically it is not involved thereby. Such entities are, proximally and for the
most part, those with which we concern ourselves when we do not let them

‘be’  as  we  have  discovered  that  they  are,  but  work  upon  them,  make
improvements in them, or smash them to pieces.

When we  speak of having  already let something be involved, so that it
has been freed for that involvement, we are using a perfect tense  a  p r i o r
i    which  characterizes  the  kind  of  Being  belonging  to  Dasein  itself.(3)
Letting an entity be involved, if we understand this ontologically, consists
in  previously  freeing  it  for  [auf]  its  readiness-to-hand  within  the
environment.
 

1.  ‘Bewendenlassen  bedeutet  ontisch;  innerhalb  eines  faktischen  Besorgens  ein  Zuhandenes  so

und so sein lassen, wie es nunmehr ist und damit es so ist.’

2.  ‘…es  im  ontischen  Sinne  dabei  bewenden  lassen  kann.’  While  we  have  translated  ‘dabei’
simply  as  ‘thereby’  in  this  context,  it  is  possible  that  it  should  have  been  construed  rather  as  an
instance  of  the  special  use  of  ‘bei’  with  ‘bewenden  lassen’.  A  similar  ambiguity  occurs  in  the
following sentence.

3.  ‘Das  auf  Bewandtnis  hin  freigebende  Je-schon-haben-bewenden-lassen  ist  ein  apriorisches

Perfekt, das die Seinsart des Daseins selbst charakterisiert.

When we let something be involved, it must be involved in something;
and  in  terms  of  this  “in-which”,  the  “with-which”  of  this  involvement  is
freed.(1)  Our  concern  encounters  it  as  this  thing  that  is  ready-to-hand.  To
the  extent  that any entity shows  itself to  concern(2)—that  is,  to  the  extent
that  it  is  discovered  in  its  Being—it  is  already  something  ready-to-hand
environmentally;  it  just  is  not  ‘proximally’  a  ‘world-stuff’  that  is  merely
present-at-hand.

As  the  Being  of  something  ready-to-hand,  an  involvement  is  itself
discovered  only  on  the  basis  of  the  prior  discovery  of  a  totality  of
involvements.  So  in  any  involvement  that  has  been  discovered  (that  is,  in
anything  ready-to-hand  which  we  encounter),  what  we  have  called  the
“worldly  character”  of  the  ready-to-hand  has  been  discovered  beforehand.
In  this  totality  of  involvements  which  has  been  discovered  beforehand,
there  lurks  an  ontological  relationship  to  the  world.  In  letting  entities  be
involved so that they are freed for a totality of involvements, one must have
disclosed already that for which [woraufhin] they have been freed. But that
for  which  something  environmentally  ready-to-hand  has  thus  been  freed
(and indeed in such a manner that it becomes accessible as an entity within-
the-world  first  of  all),  cannot  itself  be  conceived  as  an  entity  with  this
discovered kind of Being. It is essentially not discoverable, if we henceforth

reserve “discoveredness” as  a  term  for  a  possibility  of  Being  which  every
entity without the character of Dasein may possess.

H. 86

 

But what does it mean to say that that for which(3) entities within-the-
world  are  proximally  freed  must  have  been  previously  disclosed?  To
Dasein’s  Being,  an  understanding  of  Being  belongs.  Any  understanding
[Verständnis] has its Being in an act of understanding [Verstehen]. If Being-
in-the-world is a kind of Being which is essentially befitting to Dasein, then
to  understand  Being-in-the-world  belongs  to  the  essential  content  of  its
understanding of Being. The previous disclosure of that for which what we
encounter  within-the-world  is  subsequently  freed,(4)  amounts  to  nothing
else than understanding the world—that world towards which Dasein as an
entity always comports itself.
 

1. ‘Aus dem Wobei des Bewendenlassens her ist das Womit der Bewandtnis freigegeben.’
2.  Here  we  follow  the  newer  editions  in  reading:  ‘Sofern  sich  ihm  überhaupt  ein  Seiendes
zeigt...’. The older editions read ‘Sofern sich mit ihm...’, which is somewhat ambiguous but suggests
that we should write: ‘To the extent that with what is ready-to-hand any entity shows itself…’.

3. ‘worauf’. The older editions have ‘woraufhin’.
4.  ‘Das  vorgängige  Erschliessen  dessen,  woraufhin  die  Freigabe  des 

innerweltlichen

Begegnenden erfolgt...’

Whenever we let there be an involvement with something in something
beforehand,  our  doing  so  is  grounded  in  our  understanding  such  things  as
letting something be involved, and such things as the “with-which” and the
“in-which” of involvements. Anything of this sort, and anything else that is
basic  for  it,  such  as  the  “towards-this”  as  that  in  which  there  is  an
involvement,  or  such  as  the  “for-the-sake-of-which”  to  which  every
“towards-which”  ultimately  goes  back(1)—all  these  must  be  disclosed
beforehand with a certain intelligibility [Verständlichkeit]. And what is that
wherein Dasein as Being-in-the-world understands itself pre-ontologically?
In understanding a context of relations such as we have mentioned, Dasein
has assigned itself to an “in-order-to” [Um-zu], and it has done so in terms
of a potentiality-for-Being for the sake of which it itself  i s—one which it
may have seized upon either explicitly or tacitly, and which may be either
authentic or inauthentic. This “in-order-to” prescribes a “towards-this” as a
possible “in-which” for letting something be involved; and the structure of

letting  it be involved implies  that this is  an involvement  which something
has—an involvement which is with something. Dasein always assigns itself
from a “for-the-sake-of-which” to the “with-which” of an involvement; that
is  to  say,  to  the  extent  that  it  is,  it  always  lets  entities  be  encountered  as
ready-to-hand.(2)  That  wherein 
itself
beforehand in the mode of assigning itself is that for which [das Woraufhin]
it  has  let  entities  be  encountered  beforehand.  The  “wherein”  of  an  act  of
understanding  which  assigns  or  refers  itself,  is  that  for  which  one  lets
entities  be  encountered  in  the  kind  of  Being  that  belongs  to  involvements;
and this “wherein” is the phenomenon of the world.(3) And the structure of
that  to  which  [woraufhin]  Dasein  assigns  itself  is  what  makes  up  the
worldhood of the world.
 

[Worin]  Dasein  understands 

1.  ‘…wie  das  Dazu,  als  wobei  es  die  Bewandtnis  hat,  das  Worum-willen,  darauf  letztlich  alles
Wozu  zurückgeht.’  The  older  editions  have  ‘...als  wobei  es  je  die  Bewandtnis  hat...’  and  omit  the
hyphen in ‘Worum-willen’.

2.  ‘Dieses  zeichnet  ein  Dazu  vor,  als  mögliches  Wobei  eines  Bewendenlassens,  das
strukturmässig  mit  etwas  bewenden  lässt.  Dasein  verweist  sich  je  schon  immer  aus  einem  Worum-
willen her an das Womit einer Bewandtnis, d. h. es lässt je immer schon, sofern es ist, Seiendes als
Zuhandenes begegnen.’

3.  ‘Das  Worin  des  sichverweisenden  Verstehens  als  Woraufhin  des  Begegnenlassens  von

Seiendem in der Seinsart der Bewandtnis ist das Phänomen der Welt.’
 

That  wherein  Dasein  already  understands  itself  in  this  way  is  always
something  with  which  it  is  primordially  familiar.  This  familiarity  with  the
world does not necessarily require that the relations which are constitutive
for  the  world  as  world  should  be  theoretically  transparent.  However,  the
possibility  of  giving  these  relations  an  explicit  ontologico-existential
Interpretation,  is  grounded  in  this  familiarity  with  the  world;  and  this
familiarity, in turn, is constitutive for Dasein, and goes to make up Dasein’s
understanding  of  Being.  This  possibility  is  one  which  can  be  seized  upon
explicitly  in  so  far  as  Dasein  has  set  itself  the  task  of  giving  a  primordial
Interpretation  for  its  own  Being  and  for  the  possibilities  of  that  Being,  or
indeed for the meaning of Being in general.

H. 87

 

But  as  yet  our  analyses  have  done  no  more  than  lay  bare  the  horizon
within which such things as the  world and worldhood are  to  be sought.  If

we are to consider these further, we must, in the first instance, make it still
more  clear  how  the  context  of  Dasein’s  assigning-itself  is  to  be  taken
ontologically.

In  the  act  of  understanding  [Verstehen],  which  we  shall  analyse  more
thoroughly later (Compare Section 31), the  relations  indicated above must
have been previously disclosed; the act of understanding holds them in this
disclosedness.  It  holds  itself  in  them  with  familiarity;  and  in  so  doing,  it
holds  them  before itself,  for  it  is  in  these  that  its  assignment  operates.(1)
The understanding lets itself make assignments both  i n  these relationships
themselves  and    o  f    them.(2)  The  relational  character  which  these
relationships  of  assigning  possess,  we  take  as  one  of  signifying.(3)  In  its
familiarity  with  these  relationships,  Dasein  ‘signifies’  to  itself:  in  a
primordial  manner  it  gives  itself  both  its  Being  and  its  potentiality-for-
Being  as  something  which  it  is  to  understand  with  regard  to  its  Being-in-
the-world.  The  “for-the-sake-of-which”  signifies  an  “in-order-to”;  this  in
turn,  a  “towards-this”;  the  latter,  an  “in-which”  of  letting  something  be
involved;  and  that  in  turn,  the  “with-which”  of  an  involvement.  These
relationships  are  bound  up  with  one  another  as  a  primordial  totality;  they
are  what  they  are    a  s   this  signifying  [Be-deuten]  in  which  Dasein  gives
itself beforehand its Being-in-the-world as something to be understood. The
relational  totality  of  this  signifying  we  call  “significance”.  This  is  what
makes up the structure of the world—the structure of that wherein Dasein
as such already is. Dasein, in its familiarity with significance, is the ontical
condition for the possibility of discovering entities which are encountered in
a  world  with  involvement  (readiness-to-hand)  as  their  kind  of  Being,  and
which can thus make themselves known as they are in themselves [in seinem
An-sich].
 

1.  ‘Das...  Verstehen...  hält  die  angezeigten  Bezüge  in  einer  vorgängigen  Erschlossenheit.  Im
vertrauten  Sich-darin-halten  hält  es sich  diese vor als  das,  worin  sich  sein  Verweisen  bewegt.’  The
context  suggests  that  Heidegger’s  ‘diese’  refers  to  the  relationships  (Bezüge)  rather  than  to  the
disclosedness  (Erschlossenheit),  though  the  latter  interpretation  seems  a  bit  more  plausible
grammatically.

2. ‘Das Verstehen lässt sich in und von diesen Bezügen selbst verweisen.’ It is not entirely clear

whether ‘von’ should be translated as ‘of’, from’, or ‘by’.

3. ‘be-deuten’. While Heidegger ordinarily writes this word without a hyphen (even, for instance,
in  the  next  sentence),  he  here  takes  pains  to  hyphenate  it  so  as  to  suggest  that  etymologically  it
consists of the intensive prefix ‘be-’ followed by the verb ‘deuten’—to ‘interpret’, ‘explain’ or ‘point
to’  something.  We  shall  continue  to  follow  our  convention  of  usually  translating  ‘bedeuten’  and
for
‘Bedeutung’  by 

‘signify’  and 

‘signification’ 

‘significance’ 

respectively, 

reserving 

‘Bedeutsamkeit’ (or, in a few cases, for ‘Bedeutung’). But these translations obscure the underlying
meanings which Heidegger is emphasizing in this passage.

Dasein as such is always something of this sort; along with its Being, a
context of the ready-to-hand is already essentially discovered: Dasein, in so
far  as  it  is,  has  always  submitted(1)  itself  already  to  a  ‘world’  which  it
encounters, and this submission(1) belongs essentially to its Being.
 

1.  ‘angewiesen’;  ‘Angewiesenheit’.  The  verb  ‘anweisen’,  like  ‘verweisen’,  can  often  be
translated as ‘assign’, particularly in the sense in which one assigns or allots a place to something, or
in the sense in which one gives an ‘assignment’ to someone by instructing him how to proceed. The
past participle ‘angewiesen’ can thus mean ‘assigned’ in either of these senses; but it often takes on
the  connotation  of  ‘being  dependent  on’  something  or  even  ‘at  the  mercy’  of  something.  In  this
passage  we  have  tried  to  compromise  by  using  the  verb  ‘submit’.  Other  passages  call  for  other
idioms, and no single standard translation seems feasible.

But  in  significance  itself,  with  which  Dasein  is  always  familiar,  there
lurks  the  ontological  condition  which  makes  it  possible  for  Dasein,  as
something  which  understands  and  interprets,  to  disclose  such  things  as
‘significations’; upon these, in turn, is founded the Being of words and of
language.

The  significance  thus  disclosed  is  an  existential  state  of  Dasein—of  its
Being-in-the-world; and as such it is the ontical condition for the possibility
that a totality of involvements can be discovered.

If  we  have  thus  determined  that  the  Being  of  the  ready-to-hand
(involvement)  is  definable  as  a  context  of  assignments  or  references,  and
that even worldhood may so be defined, then has not the ‘substantial Being’
of  entities  within-the-world  been  volatilized  into  a  system  of  Relations?
And  inasmuch  as  Relations  are  always  ‘something  thought’,  has  not  the
Being of entities within-the-world been dissolved into ‘pure thinking’?

H. 88

 

Within  our  present  field  of  investigation  the  following  structures  and
dimensions of ontological problematics, as we have repeatedly emphasized,
must be kept in principle distinct: 1. the Being of those entities within-the-
world which we proximally encounter—readiness-to-hand; 2. the Being of
those  entities  which  we  can  come  across  and  whose  nature  we  can
determine  if  we  discover  them  in  their  own  right  by  going  through  the

entities  proximally  encountered—presence-at-hand;  3.  the  Being  of  that
ontical condition which makes it possible for entities within-the-world to be
discovered  at  all—the  worldhood  of  the  world.  This  third  kind  of  Being
gives us an existential way of determining the nature of Being-in-the-world,
that  is,  of  Dasein.  The  other  two  concepts  of  Being  are  categories,  and
pertain to entities whose Being is not of the kind which Dasein possesses.
The  context  of  assignments  or  references,  which,  as  significance,  is
constitutive for worldhood, can be taken formally in the sense of a system
of Relations. But one must note that in such formalizations the phenomena
get  levelled  off  so  much  that  their  real  phenomenal  content  may  be  lost,
especially in the case of such ‘simple’ relationships as those which lurk in
significance.  The  phenomenal  content  of  these  ‘Relations’  and  ‘Relata’—
the  “in-order-to”,  the  “for-the-sake-of”,  and  the  “with-which”  of  an
involvement—is  such 
resist  any  sort  of  mathematical
functionalization; nor are they merely something thought, first posited in an
‘act  of  thinking.’  They  are  rather  relationships  in  which  concernful
circumspection  as  such  already  dwells.  This  ‘system  of  Relations’,  as
something constitutive for worldhood, is so far from volatilizing the Being
of  the  ready-to-hand  within-the-world,  that  the  worldhood  of  the  world
provides the basis on which such entities can for the first time be discovered
as they are ‘substantially’ ‘in themselves’. And only if entities within-the-
world can be encountered at all, is it possible, in the field of such entities, to
make  accessible  what  is  just  present-at-hand  and  no  more.  By  reason  of
their Being-just-present-at-hand-and-no-more, these latter entities can have
their 
‘functional  concepts.’
Ontologically, such concepts are possible only in relation to entities whose
Being has the character of pure substantiality. Functional concepts are never
possible except as formalized substantial concepts.

‘properties’  defined  mathematically 

they 

that 

in 

In  order  to  bring  out  the  specifically  ontological  problematic  of
worldhood  even  more  sharply,  we  shall  carry  our  analysis  no  further  until
we have clarified our Interpretation of worldhood by a case at the opposite
extreme.

B. A Contrast between our Analysis of Worldhood and Descartes’

Interpretation of the World

 

H. 89

 

Only step by step can the concept of worldhood and the structures which
this  phenomenon  embraces  be  firmly  secured  in  the  course  of  our
investigation.  The  Interpretation  of  the  world  begins,  in  the  first  instance,
with some entity within-the-world, so that the phenomenon of the world in
general no longer comes into view; we shall accordingly try to clarify this
approach  ontologically  by  considering  what  is  perhaps  the  most  extreme
form in which it has been carried out. We not only shall present briefly the
basic features of Descartes’ ontology of the ‘world’, but shall inquire into
its presuppositions and try to characterize these in the light of what we have
hitherto achieved. The account we shall give of these matters will enable us
to  know  upon  what  basically  undiscussed  ontological  ‘foundations’  those
Interpretations  of  the  world  which  have  come  after  Descartes—and  still
more those which preceded him—have operated.

Descartes  sees  the  extensio  as  basically  definitive  ontologically  for  the
world.  In  so  far  as  extension  is  one  of  the  constituents  of  spatiality
(according  to  Descartes  it  is  even  identical  with  it),  while  in  some  sense
spatiality  remains  constitutive  for  the  world,  a  discussion  of  the  Cartesian
ontology of the ‘world’ will provide us likewise with a negative support for
a  positive  explication  of  the  spatiality  of  the  environment  and  of  Dasein
itself.  With  regard  to  Descartes’  ontology  there  are  three  topics  which  we
shall treat: 1. the definition of the ‘world’ as res extensa (Section 19); 2. the
foundations  of  this  ontological  definition  (Section  20); 3.  a  hermeneutical
discussion  of  the  Cartesian  ontology  of  the  ‘world’  (Section  21).  The
considerations which follow will not have been grounded in full detail until
the  ‘cogito  sum’  has  been  phenomenologically  destroyed.  (See  Part  Two,
Division 2.)(1)
 

1. This portion of Being and Time has never been published.

19. The Definition of the ‘World’ as  r e s  e x t e n s a.

 

 

H. 90

Descartes  distinguishes  the  ‘ego  cogito’  from  the  ‘res  corporea’.  This
distinction will thereafter be determinative ontologically for the distinction
between  ‘Nature’  and  ‘spirit’.  No  matter  with  how  many  variations  of
content  the  opposition  between  ‘Nature’  and  ‘spirit’  may  get  set  up
ontically,  its  ontological  foundations,  and  indeed  the  very  poles  of  this
opposition,  remain  unclarified;  this  unclarity  has  its  proximate  [nächste]
roots  in  Descartes’  distinction.  What  kind  of  understanding  of  Being  does
he have when he defines the Being of these entities? The term for the Being
of  an  entity  that  is  in  itself,  is  “substantia”.  Sometimes  this  expression
means the Being of an entity as substance, substantiality; at  other times it
means the entity itself, a substance. That “substantia” is  used in  these two
ways  is  no  accidental;  this  already  holds  for  the  ancient  conception  of
οὐσία.

To  determine  the  nature  of  the  res  corporea  ontologically,  we  must
explicate  the  substance  of  this  entity  as  a  substance—that  is,  its
substantiality. What makes up the authentic Being-in-itself [An-ihm-selbst-
sein] of the res corporea? How is it at all possible to grasp a substance as
such,  that  is,  to  grasp  its  substantiality?  “Et  quidem  ex  quolibet  attributo
substantia cognoscitur; sed una  tamen est cuiusque substantiae praecipua
proprietas,  quae ipsius  naturam essentiamque constituit, et  ad  quam aliae
omnes  referuntur.”(iii)  Substances  become  accessible  in  their  ‘attributes’,
and every substance has some distinctive property from which the essence
of  the  substantiality  of  that  definite  substance  can  be  read  off.  Which
property is this in the case of the res corporea? “Nempe  e x t e n s i o  in
longum, 
naturam
constituit.”(iv)  Extension—namely,  in  length,  breadth,  and  thickness—
makes  up  the  real  Being  of  that  corporeal  substance  which  we  call  the
‘world’.  What  gives the extensio  this distinctive  status? “Nam  omne  aliud
quod corpori tribui potest,  extensionem praesupponit...”(v)  Extension  is  a
state-of-Being  constitutive  for  the  entity  we  are  talking  about;  it  is  that
which  must  already  ‘be’  before  any  other  ways  in  which  Being  is
determined,  so  that  these  can  ‘be’  what  they  are.  Extension  must  be
‘assigned’  [“zugewiesen”]  primarily  to  the  corporeal  Thing.  The  ‘world’s’
extension and substantiality (which itself is characterized by extension) are
accordingly  demonstrated  by  showing  how  all  the  other  characteristics
which this substance definitely possesses (especially divisio, figura, motus),

profundum, 

substantiae 

corporeae 

latum 

et 

can  be  conceived  only  as  modi  of  extensio,  while,  on  the  other  hand,
extensio sine figura vel motu remains quite intelligible.

Thus  a  corporeal  Thing  that  maintains  its  total  extension  can  still
undergo many changes in the ways in which that extension is distributed in
the various dimensions, and can present itself in manifold shapes as one and
the  same  Thing.  “...  atque  unum  et  idem  corpus,  retinendo  suam  eandem
quantitatem,  pluribus  diversis  modis  potest  extendi:  nunc  scilicet  magis
secundum longitudinem, minusque secundum latitudinem vel profunditatem,
ac  paulo  post  e  contra  magis  secundum  latitudinem,  et  minus  secundum
longitudinem.”(vi)
 

iii. Descartes, Principia Philosophiae,  I,  Pr.  53.  (Œuvres,  ed.  Adam  and  Tannery,  vol.  VIII,  p.
25.) [‘And though substance is indeed known by some attribute, yet for each substance there is pre-
eminently  one  property  which  constitutes  its  nature  and  essence,  and  to  which  all  the  rest  are
referred.’—Tr.]

iv. Ibid. [‘Indeed extension in  length,  breadth,  and  thickness  constitutes  the  nature  of  corporeal

substance.’ The emphasis is Heidegger’s.—Tr.]

v. Ibid. [‘For everything else that can be ascribed to body presupposes extension.’—Tr.]
vi. Ibid., Pr.  64,  p.  31.  [‘And  one  and  the  same  body  can  be  extended  in  many  different  ways
while retaining the same quantity it had before; surely it can sometimes be greater in length and less
in breadth or thickness, while later it may, on the contrary, be greater in breadth and less in length.’—
Tr.]

H. 91

 

Shape  is  a  modus of extensio,  and  so  is  motion:  for  motus  is  grasped
only  “si  de  nullo  nisi  locali  cogitemus,  ac  de  vi  a  qua  excitatur…  non
inquiramus.”(vii)  If  the  motion  is  a  property  of  the  res  corporea,  and  a
property which  i s, then in order for it to be experienceable in its Being, it
must  be  conceived  in  terms  of  the  Being  of  this  entity  itself,  in  terms  of
extensio; this means that it must be conceived as mere change of location.
So nothing like ‘force’ counts for anything in determining what the Being
of this entity is. Matter may have such definite characteristics as hardness,
weight, and colour (durities, pondus, color); but these can all be taken away
from it, and it still remains what it is. These do not go to make up its real
Being;  and  in  so  far  as  they  are,  they  turn  out  to  be  modes  of  extensio.
Descartes  tries  to  show  this  in  detail  with  regard  to  ‘hardness’:  “Nam,
quantum ad duritiem, nihil aliud de illa sensus nobis indicat, quam partes
durorum  corporum  resistere  motui  manuum  nostrarum,  cum  in  illas
incurrant.  Si  enim,  quotiescunque  manus  nostrae  versus  aliquam  partem

moventur,  corpora  omnia  ibi  existentia  recederent  eadem  celeritate  qua
illae  accedunt,  nullam  unquam  duritiem  sentiremus.  Nec  ullo  modo  potest
intelligi,  corpora  quae  sic  recederent,  idcirco  naturam  corporis  esse
amissura;  nec  proinde  ipsa  in  duritie  consistit.”(viii)  Hardness  is
experienced  when  one  feels  one’s  way  by  touch  [Tasten].  What  does  the
sense  of  touch  ‘tell’  us  about  it?  The  parts  of  the  hard  Thing  ‘resist’  a
movement of the hand, such as an attempt to push it away. If, however, hard
bodies, those which do not give way, should change their locations with the
same  velocity  as  that  of  the  hand  which  ‘strikes  at’  them,  nothing  would
ever  get  touched  [Berühren],  and  hardness  would  not  be  experienced  and
would  accordingly  never  be.  But  it  is  quite  incomprehensible  that  bodies
which give way with such velocity should thus forfeit any of their corporeal
Being.  If  they  retain  this  even  under  a  change  in  velocity  which  makes  it
impossible for anything like ‘hardness’ to be, then hardness does not belong
to  the  Being  of  entities  of  this  sort.  “Eademque  ratione  ostendi  potest,  et
pondus,  et  colorem,  et  alias  omnes  eiusmodi  qualitates,  quae  in  materia
corporea  sentiuntur,  ex  ea  tolli  posse,  ipsa  integra  remanente:  unde
sequitur,  a  nulla  ex  illis  eius  <sc.  extensionis>  naturam  dependere.”(ix)
Thus  what  makes  up  the  Being  of  the  res  corporea  is  the  extensio:  that
which is omnimodo divisibile,  figurabile  et  mobile  (that  which can change
itself by being divided, shaped, or moved in any way), that which is capax
mutationum—that  which  maintains  itself  (remanet)  through  all  these
changes.  In  any  corporeal  Thing  the  real  entity  is  what  is  suited  for  thus
remaining  constant  [ständigen  Verbleib],  so  much  so,  indeed  that  this  is
how the substantiality of such a substance gets characterized.
 

vii. Ibid., Pr. 65, p. 32. [‘...if we think of nothing except what has a place, and do not ask about

the force by which it is set in motion…’—Tr.]

viii. Ibid., II, Pr. 4. p. 42 [‘For, so far as hardness is concerned, the sense shows us nothing else
about  it  than  that  portions  of  hard  bodies  resist  the  movement  of  our  hands  when  they  come  up
against those portions. For if whenever our hands are moved towards a certain portion, all the bodies
there should retreat with the same velocity as that with which our hands approach, we should never
feel any hardness. Nor is it in any way intelligible that bodies which thus recede should accordingly
lose their corporeal nature; hence this does not consist in hardness.’—Tr.]

ix. Ibid. [‘And  by  the same  reasoning  it can  be  shown  that  weight and  colour  and  all  the other
qualities  of  this  sort  which  are  sensed  in  corporeal  matter,  can  be  taken  away  from  it,  while  that
matter  remains  entire;  it  follows  that  the  nature  of  this  <viz.  of  extension>  depends  upon  none  of
these.’—Tr.]

20. Foundations of the Ontological Definition of the ‘World’

 

 

H. 92

is 

the 

to  which 

Substantiality 

the  ontological
idea  of  Being 
characterization of the res extensa  harks  back. “Per    s  u  b  s  t  a  n  t  i  a  m
 nihil aliud intelligere possumus, quam rem quae ita existit, ut nulla alia re
indigeat  ad  existendum.”  “By  substance  we  can  understand  nothing  else
than an entity which is in such a way that it needs no other entity in order to
be.”(x) The Being of a ‘substance’ is characterized by not needing anything.
That  whose  Being  is  such  that  it  has  no  need  at  all  for  any  other  entity
satisfies  the  idea  of  substance  in  the  authentic  sense;  this  entity  is  the  ens
perfectissimum. “…substantia  quae  nulla  plane  re  indigeat,  unica  tantum
potest intelligi, nempe Deus.”(xi) Here ‘God’ is a purely ontological term,
if it is to be understood as ens perfectissimum. At the same time, the ‘self-
evident’  connotation  of  the  concept  of  God  is  such  as  to  permit  an
ontological interpretation for the characteristic of not needing anything—a
constitutive  item  in  substantiality.  “Alias  vero  omnes  <res>,  non  nisi  ope
concursus Dei existere posse percipimus.”(xii) All  entities other  than  God
need to be “produced” in the widest sense and also to be sustained. ‘Being’
is  to  be  understood  within  a  horizon  which  ranges  from  the  production  of
what  is  to  be  present-at-hand  to  something  which  has  no  need  of  being
produced.  Every  entity  which  is  not  God  is  an  ens  creatum.  The  Being
which  belongs  to  one  of  these  entities  is  ‘infinitely’  different  from  that
which belongs to the other; yet we still consider creation and creator alike
as entities. We are thus using “Being” in so wide a sense that its meaning
embraces  an  ‘infinite’  difference.  So  even  created  entities  can  be  called
“substance” with some right. Relative to God, of course, these entities need
to be produced and sustained; but within the realm of created entities—the
‘world’ in the sense of ens creatum—there are things which ‘are in need of
no other entity’ relatively to the creaturely production and sustentation that
we find, for instance, in man. Of these substances there are two kinds: the
res cogitans and the res extensa.
 

x. Ibid., I, Pr. 51, p. 24. [‘Indeed we perceive that no other things exist without the help of God’s

xi. Ibid. [‘...only one substance which is in need of nothing whatsoever, can be understood, and

concurrence.’—Tr.]

this indeed is God.’—Tr.]

xii.  Ibid.  [‘Indeed  we  perceive  that  other  things  cannot  exist  without  the  help  of  God’s

concurrence.’—Tr.]

H. 93

 

The Being of that substance whose distinctive proprietas is presented by
extensio thus becomes definable in principle ontologically if we clarify the
meaning of Being which is ‘common’ to the three kinds of substances, one
of  them  infinite,  the  others  both  finite.  But  “...nomen  substantiae  non
convenit Deo et illis  u n i v o c e  ut  dici solet  in  Scholis,  hoc est... quae
Deo  et  creaturis  sit  communis.”(xiii)  Here  Descartes  touches  upon  a
problem with which medieval ontology was often busied—the question of
how  the  signification  of  “Being”  signifies  any  entity  which  one  may  on
occasion  be  considering.  In  the  assertions  ‘God  is’  and  ‘the  world  is’,  we
assert  Being.  This  word  ‘is’,  however,  cannot  be  meant  to  apply  to  those
entities in the same sense (συνωνύμως, univoce),when  between them there
is an infinite difference of Being; if the signification of ‘is’ were univocal,
then  what  is  created  would  be  viewed  as  if  it  were  uncreated,  or  the
uncreated would be reduced to the status of something created. But neither
does ‘Being’ function as a mere name which is the same in both cases: in
both  cases  ‘Being’  is  understood.  This  positive  sense  in  which  ‘Being’
signifies is one which the Schoolmen took as a signification ‘by analogy’,
as  distinguished  from  one  which  is  univocal  or  merely  homonymous.
is
Taking 
foreshadowed  in  prototypical  form  just  as  at  the  very  outset  of  Greek
ontology,  they  established  various  kinds  of  analogy,  so  that  even  the
‘Schools’  have  different  ways  of  taking  the  signification-function  of
“Being”. In working out this problem ontologically, Descartes is always far
behind  the  Schoolmen;(xiv)  indeed  he  evades  the  question.  “...nulla  eius
<substantiae>  nominis  significatio  potest  distincte  intelligi,  quae  Deo  et
creaturis  sit  communis.”(xv)  This  evasion  is  tantamount  to  his  failing  to
discuss the meaning of Being which the idea of substantiality embraces, or
the  character  of  the  ‘universality’  which  belongs  to  this  signification.  Of
course even the ontology of the medievals has gone no further than that of
the  ancients  in  inquiring  into  what  “Being”  itself  may  mean.  So  it  is  not
surprising  if  no  headway  is  made  with  a  question  like  that  of  the  way  in
which “Being” signifies, as long as this has to be discussed on the basis of

their  departure  from  Aristotle, 

this  problem 

in  whom 

an  unclarified  meaning  of  Being  which  this  signification  ‘expresses’.  The
meaning remains unclarified because it is held to be ‘self-evident’.
 

xiii.  Ibid.  [The  complete  passage  may  be  translated  as  follows:  ‘The  name  “substance”  is  not
appropriate to God and to these univocally, as they say in the Schools; that is, no signification of this
name which would be common to both God and his creation can be distinctly understood.’—Tr.]

xiv. In this connection, cf. Opuscula omnia Thomae de Vio Caietani Cardinalis, Lugduni, 1580,

Tomus III, Tractatus V; ‘de nominum analogia’, pp. 211—219.

xv.  Descartes,  op.  cit.,  I,  Pr.  51,  p.  24.  [‘No  signification  of  this  name  <  “substance”>  which

would be common to God and his creation can be distinctly understood.’—Tr.]

H. 94

 

Descartes  not  only  evades  the  ontological  question  of  substantiality
altogether; he also emphasizes explicitly that substance as such—that is to
say,  its  substantiality—is  in  and  for  itself  inaccessible  from  the  outset
[vorgängig].  “Verumtamen  non  potest  substantia  primum  animadverti  ex
hoc  solo,  quod  sit  res  existens,  quia  hoc  solum  per  se  nos  non
afficit…”(xvi) ‘Being’  itself  does  not  ‘affect’  us,  and  therefore  cannot  be
perceived.  ‘Being  is  not  a  Real  predicate,’  says  Kant,(1)  who  is  merely
repeating Descartes’ principle. Thus the possibility of a pure problematic of
Being gets renounced in principle, and a way is sought for arriving at those
definite  characteristics  of  substance  which  we  have  designated  above.
Because  ‘Being’  is  not  in  fact  accessible  as  an  entity,  it  is  expressed
through  attributes—definite  characteristics  of 
the  entities  under
consideration,  characteristics  which  themselves    a  r  e.(2)  Being  is  not
expressed through just  a n y  such characteristics, but rather through those
that  meaning  of  “Being”  and
satisfying 
“substantiality”, which has still been tacitly presupposed. To the substantia
finita as res corporea, what must primarily be ‘assigned’ [“Zuweisung”] is
the  extensio.  “Quin  et  facilius  intelligimus  substantiam  extensam,  vel
substantiam  cogitantem,  quam  substantiam  solam,  omisso  eo  quod  cogitet
vel  sit  extensa”;(xvii)  for  substantiality  is  detachable  ratione  tantum;  it  is
not detachable realiter, nor can we come across it in the way in which we
come across those entities themselves which are substantially.

the  purest  manner 

in 

Thus the ontological grounds for defining the ‘world’ as res extensa have
been  made  plain:  they  lie  in  the  idea  of  substantiality,  which  not  only
remains  unclarified  in  the  meaning  of  its  Being,  but  gets  passed  off  as
something incapable of clarification, and gets represented indirectly by way

of  whatever  substantial  property  belongs  most  pre-eminently  to  the
particular substance. Moreover, in this way of defining “substance” through
some substantial entity, lies the reason why the term “substance” is used in
two ways. What is here intended is substantiality; and it gets understood in
terms  of  a  characteristic  of  substance—a  characteristic  which  is  itself  an
entity.(3) Because something ontical is made to underlie the ontological, the
expression “substantia” functions  sometimes  with  a  signification  which  is
ontological,  sometimes  with  one  which  is  ontical,  but  mostly  with  one
which  is  hazily  ontico-ontological.  Behind  this  slight  difference  of
signification,  however,  there  lies  hidden  a  failure  to  master  the  basic
problem  of  Being.  To  treat  this  adequately,  we  must  ‘track  down’  the
equivocations in the right way. He who attempts this sort of thing does not
just  ‘busy  himself’  with  ‘merely  verbal  significations’;  he  must  venture
forward into the most primordial problematic of the ‘things themselves’ to
get such ‘nuances’ straightened out.
 

xvi. Ibid., I, Pr. 52, p. 25. [‘Yet substance cannot first be discovered merely by the fact that it is a

thing that exists, for this alone by itself does not affect us.’—Tr.]

xvii.  Ibid.,  I,  Pr.  63,  p.  31.  [‘Indeed  we  understand  extended  substance,  or  thinking  substance

more easily than substance alone, disregarding that which thinks or is extended.’—Tr.]
 

1.  Immanuel  Kant,  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  Transcendental  Dialectic,  Book  II,  chapter  III,

Section 4.

2. ‘…seiende Bestimmtheiten des betreffenden Seienden...’
3. ‘…aus einer seienden Beschaffenheit der Substanz.’

21.  Hermeneutical  Discussion  of  the  Cartesian  Ontology  of  the

‘World’
 

H. 95

 

The critical question now arises: does this ontology of the ‘world’ seek
the phenomenon of the world at all, and if not, does it at least define some
entity  within-the-world  fully  enough  so  that  the  worldly  character  of  this
entity can be made visible in it? To both questions we must answer “No”.
The entity which Descartes is trying to grasp ontologically and in principle
with his “extensio”, is rather such as to become discoverable first of all by
going through an entity within-the-world which is proximally ready-to-hand

is 

this 

the  case,  and 

though  any  ontological
—Nature.  Though 
characterization  of  this  latter  entity  within-the-world  may  lead  us  into
obscurity,  even  if  we  consider  both  the  idea  of  substantiality  and  the
meaning of the “existit” and “ad existendum” which have been brought into
the definition of that idea, it still remains possible that through an ontology
based  upon  a  radical  separation  of  God,  the  “I”,  and  the  ‘world’,  the
ontological  problem  of  the  world  will  in  some  sense  get  formulated  and
further  advanced.  If,  however,  this  is  not  possible,  we  must  then
demonstrate  explicitly  not  only  that  Descartes’  conception  of  the  world  is
ontologically  defective,  but  that  his  Interpretation  and  the  foundations  on
which  it  is  based  have  led  him  to  pass  over both  the  phenomenon  of  the
world and the Being of those entities within-the-world which are proximally
ready-to-hand.

In  our  exposition  of  the  problem  of  worldhood  (Section  14),  we
suggested  the  importance  of  obtaining  proper  access  to  this  phenomenon.
So in criticizing the Cartesian point of departure, we must ask which kind of
Being that belongs to Dasein we should fix upon as giving us an appropriate
way  of  access  to  those  entities  with  whose  Being  as  extensio  Descartes
equates  the  Being  of  the  ‘world’.  The  only  genuine  access  to  them  lies  in
knowing  [Erkennen],  intellectio,  in  the  sense  of  the  kind  of  knowledge
[Erkenntnis] we get in mathematics and physics. Mathematical knowledge
is regarded by Descartes as the one manner of apprehending entities which
can  always  give  assurance  that  their  Being  has  been  securely  grasped.  If
anything  measures  up  in  its  own  kind  of  Being  to  the  Being  that  is
accessible  in  mathematical  knowledge,  then  it  is  in  the  authentic  sense.
Such entities are those which always are what they are.

H. 96

 

Accordingly,  that  which  can  be  shown  to  have  the  character  of
something that constantly remains (as remanens capax mutationum), makes
up the real Being of those entities of the world which get experienced. That
which  enduringly  remains,  really  is.  This  is  the  sort  of  thing  which
mathematics  knows.  That  which  is  accessible  in  an  entity  through
mathematics, makes  up  its  Being.  Thus  the  Being  of  the  ‘world’  is,  as  it
were, dictated to it in terms of a definite idea of Being which lies veiled in
the  concept  of  substantiality,  and  in  terms  of  the  idea  of  a  knowledge  by

which such entities are 
cognized. The kind of Being which belongs to entities within-the-world is
something which they themselves might have been permitted to present; but
Descartes does not let them do so.(1) Instead he prescribes for the world its
‘real’ Being, as it were, on the basis of an idea of Being whose source has
not been unveiled and which has not been demonstrated in its own right—
an idea in which Being is equated with constant presence-at-hand. Thus his
ontology  of  the  world  is  not  primarily  determined  by  his  leaning  towards
mathematics, a science which he chances to esteem very highly, but rather
by  his  ontological  orientation  in  principle  towards  Being  as  constant
presence-at-hand,  which  mathematical  knowledge  is  exceptionally  well
this  way  Descartes  explicitly  switches  over
suited 
philosophically  from  development  of  traditional  ontology  to  modern
mathematical physics and its transcendental foundations.
 

to  grasp.  In 

1. ‘Descartes lässt sich nicht die Seinsart des innerweltlichen Seienden von diesem vorgeben...’

The  problem  of  how  to  get  appropriate  access  to  entities  within-the-
world  is  one  which  Descartes  feels  no  need  to  raise.  Under  the  unbroken
ascendance  of  the  traditional  ontology,  the  way  to  get  a  genuine  grasp  of
what really  i s  [des eigentlichen Seienden] has been decided in advance: it
lies  in  νοεῖν—‘beholdlng’  in  the  widest  sense  [der  “Anschauung”  im
weitesten Sinne]; διανοείν or ‘thinking’ is just a more fully achieved form
of  νοεῖν  and  is  founded  upon  it.  Sensatio  (αἴσθησις),  as  opposed  to
intellectio,  still  remains  possible  as  a  way  of  access  to  entities  by  a
beholding  which  is  perceptual  in  character;  but  Descartes  presents  his
‘critique’ of it because he is oriented ontologically by these principles.

H. 97

 

Descartes  knows  very  well  that  entities  do  not  proximally  show
themselves  in  their  real  Being.  What  is  ‘proximally’  given  is  this  waxen
Thing  which  is  coloured,  flavoured,  hard,  and  cold  in  definite  ways,  and
which  gives  off  its  own  special  sound  when  struck.  But  this  is  not  of  any
importance  ontologically,  nor,  in  general,  is  anything  which  is  given
through  the  senses.  “Satis  erit,  si  advertamus  sensuum  perceptiones  non
referri,  nisi  ad  istam  corporis  humani  cum  mente  coniunctionem,  et  nobis

quidem ordinarie exhibere, quid ad illam externa corpora prodesse possint
aut nocere…”(xviii) The senses do not enable us to cognize any entity in its
Being; they merely serve to announce the ways in which ‘external’ Things
within-the-world  are  useful  or  harmful  for  human  creatures  encumbered
with  bodies.  “...non... nos  docere,  qualia  <corpora>  in  seipsis  existant”;
(xix)  they  tell  us  nothing  about  entities  in  their  Being.  “Quod  agentes,
percipiemus  naturam  materiae,  sive  corporis  in  universum  spectati,  non
consistere  in  eo  quod  sit  res  dura,  vel  ponderosa,  vel  colorata,  vel  alio
aliquo  modo  sensus  afficiens:  sed  tantum  in  eo  quod  sit  res  extensa  in
longum, latum et profundum.”(xx)

If we subject Descartes’ Interpretation of the experience of hardness and
resistance to a critical analysis, it will be plain how unable he is to let what
shows itself in sensation present itself in its own kind of Being,(1) or even
to determine its character (Cf. Section 19).
 

xviii. Ibid., II, Pr. 3, p. 45. [‘It will be enough if we point out that the perceptions of the senses
are  not  referred  to  anything  but  the  union  of  the  human  body  with  the  mind,  and  that  indeed  they
ordinarily show us in what way external bodies can be of help to it or do it harm.’—Tr.]

xix. Ibid., II, Pr. 3, pp. 41—42. [‘...but they do not teach us what kinds of things <bodies> exist

in themselves.’—Tr.]

xx. Ibid., II, Pr. 4, p. 42. [‘If we do this, we shall perceive that the nature of matter, or of body as
regarded universally, does not consist in its being something hard or heavy or coloured or affecting
the  senses  in  some  other  way,  but  only  in  its  being  something  extended  in  length,  breadth,  and
thickness.’—Tr.]
 

1. ‘...das in der Sinnlichkeit sich Zeigende in seiner eigenen Seinsart sich vorgeben zu lassen...’

Hardness gets taken as resistance. But neither hardness nor resistance is
understood  in  a  phenomenal  sense,  as  something  experienced  in  itself
whose  nature  can  be  determined  in  such  an  experience.  For  Descartes,
resistance  amounts  to  no  more  than  not  yielding  place—that  is,  not
undergoing any change of location. So if a Thing resists, this means that it
stays in a definite location relatively to some other Thing which is changing
its  location,  or  that  it  is  changing  its  own  location  with  a  velocity  which
permits  the  other  Thing  to  ‘catch  up’  with  it.  But  when  the  experience  of
hardness is Interpreted this way, the kind of Being which belongs to sensory
perception  is  obliterated,  and  so  is  any  possibility  that  the  entities
encountered in such perception should be grasped in their Being. Descartes
takes the kind of Being which belongs to the perception of something, and
translates  it  into  the  only  kind  he  knows:  the  perception  of  something

becomes  a  definite  way  of  Being-present-at-hand-side-by-side  of  two  res
extensae which are present-at-hand; the way in which their movements are
related is itself a mode of that extensio by which the presence-at-hand of the
corporeal Thing is primarily characterized. Of course no behaviour in which
one  feels  one’s  way  by  touch  [eines  tastenden  Verhaltens]  can  be
‘completed’ unless what can thus be felt [des Betastbaren] has ‘closeness’
of  a  very  special  kind.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  touching  [Berührung]
and 
touching  consist
ontologically in different velocities of two corporeal Things. Hardness and
resistance  do  not  show  themselves  at  all  unless  an  entity  has  the  kind  of
Being which Dasein—or at least something living—possesses.

the  hardness  which  makes 

itself  known 

in 

Thus Descartes’ discussion of possible kinds of access to entities within-
the-world is dominated by an idea of Being which has been gathered from a
definite realm of these entities themselves.

H. 98

 

The  idea  of  Being  as  permanent  presence-at-hand  not  only  gives
Descartes a motive for identifying entities within-the-world with the world
in general, and for providing so extreme a definition of their Being; it also
keeps him from bringing Dasein’s ways of behaving into view in a manner
which is ontologically appropriate. But thus the road is completely blocked
to  seeing  the  founded  character  of  all  sensory  and  intellective  awareness,
and to understanding these as possibilities of Being-in-the-world.(1) On the
contrary, he takes the Being of ‘Dasein’ (to whose basic constitution Being-
in-the-world belongs) in the very same way as he takes the Being of the res
extensa—namely, as substance.
 

1. ‘Damit ist aber vollends der Weg dazu verlegt, gar auch noch den fundierten Charakter alles
sinnlichen  und  verstandesmässigen  Vernehmens  zu  sehen  und  sie  als  eine  Möglichkeit  des  In-der-
Welt-seins zu verstehen.’ While we have construed the pronoun ‘sie’ as referring to the two kinds of
awareness which have just been mentioned, it would be grammatically more plausible to interpret it
as referring either to ‘Dasein’s ways of behaving’ or to ‘the idea of Being as permanent presence-at-
hand’.

But  with  these  criticisms,  have  we  not  fobbed  off  on  Descartes  a  task
altogether  beyond  his  horizon,  and  then  gone  on  to  ‘demonstrate’  that  he
has  failed  to  solve  it?  If  Descartes  does  not  know  the  phenomenon  of  the

world, and thus knows no such thing as within-the-world-ness, how can he
identify the world itself with certain entities within-the-world and the Being
which they possess?

In controversy over principles, one must not only attach oneself to theses
which  can  be  grasped  doxographically;  one  must  also  derive  one’s
orientation from the objective tendency of the problematic, even if it does
not go beyond a rather ordinary way of taking things. In his doctrine of the
res cogitans and the res extensa, Descartes not only wants to formulate the
problem of ‘the “I” and the world’; he claims to have solved it in a radical
manner. His Meditations make this plain. (See especially Meditations I and
VI.) By taking his basic ontological orientation from traditional sources and
not subjecting it to positive criticism, he has made it impossible to lay bare
any  primordial  ontological  problematic  of  Dasein;  this  has  inevitably
obstructed  his  view  of  the  phenomenon  of  the  world,  and  has  made  it
possible  for  the  ontology  of  the  ‘world’  to  be  compressed  into  that  of
certain  entities  within-the-world.  The  foregoing  discussion  should  have
proved this.

H. 99

 

One might retort, however, that even if in point of fact both the problem
of  the  world  and  the  Being  of  the  entities  encountered  environmentally  as
closest  to  us  remain  concealed,  Descartes  has  still  laid  the  basis  for
characterizing ontologically that entity within-the-world upon which, in its
very Being, every other entity is founded—material Nature. This would be
the fundamental stratum upon which all the other strata of actuality within-
the-world are built up. The extended Thing as such would serve, in the first
instance, as the ground for those definite characters which show themselves,
to be sure, as qualities, but which ‘at bottom’ are quantitative modifications
of  the  modes  of  the  extensio itself.  These  qualities,  which  are  themselves
reducible,  would  provide  the  footing  for  such  specific  qualities  as
“beautiful”,  “ugly”,  “in  keeping”,  “not  in  keeping,”  “useful”,  “useless”.  If
one is oriented primarily by Thinghood, these latter qualities must be taken
as  non-quantifiable  value-predicates  by  which  what  is  in  the  first  instance
just  a  material  Thing,  gets  stamped  as  something  good.  But  with  this
stratification,  we  come  to  those  entities  which  we  have  characterized
ontologically  as  equipment  ready-to-hand.  The  Cartesian  analysis  of  the

‘world’  would  thus  enable  us  for  the  first  time  to  build  up  securely  the
structure of what is proximally ready-to-hand; all it takes is to round out the
Thing  of  Nature  until  it  becomes  a  full-fledged  Thing  of  use,  and  this  is
easily done.

as 

the 

fundamental 

But  quite  apart  from  the  specific  problem  of  the  world  itself,  can  the
Being  of  what  we  encounter  proximally  within-the-world  be  reached
ontologically  by  this  procedure?  When  we  speak  of  material  Thinghood,
have we not tacitly posited a kind of Being—the constant presence-at-hand
of Things—which is so far from having been rounded out ontologically by
subsequently  endowing  entities  with  value-predicates,  that  these  value-
characters themselves are rather just ontical characteristics of those entities
which  have  the  kind  of  Being  possessed  by  Things?  Adding  on  value-
predicates cannot tell us anything at all new about the Being of goods, but
would merely presuppose again that goods have pure presence-at-hand as
their kind of Being. Values would then be determinate characteristics which
a  Thing  possesses,  and  they  would  be  present-at-hand.  They  would  have
their  sole  ultimate  ontological  source  in  our  previously  laying  down  the
even
actuality  of  Things 
prephenomenological  experience  shows  that  in  an  entity  which  is
supposedly  a  Thing,  there  is  something  that  will  not  become  fully
intelligible  through  Thinghood  alone.  Thus  the  Being  of  Things  has  to  be
rounded  out.  What,  then  does  the  Being  of  values  or  their  ‘validity’
[“Geltung”] (which Lotze took as a mode of ‘affirmation’) really amount to
ontologically?  And  what  does  it  signify  ontologically  for  Things  to  be
‘invested’ with values in this way? As long as these matters remain obscure,
to  reconstruct  the  Thing  of  use  in  terms  of  the  Thing  of  Nature  is  an
ontologically  questionable  undertaking,  even  if  one  disregards  the  way  in
which  the  problematic  has  been  perverted  in  principle.  And  if  we  are  to
reconstruct  this  Thing  of  use,  which  supposedly  comes  to  us  in  the  first
instance ‘with its skin off’, does not this always require that we previously
take a positive look at the phenomenon whose totality such a reconstruction
is to restore? But if we have not given a proper explanation beforehand of
its ownmost state of Being, are we not building our reconstruction without a
plan? Inasmuch as this reconstruction and ‘rounding-out’ of the traditional
ontology of the ‘world’ results in our reaching the same entities with which
we  started  when  we  analysed  the  readiness-to-hand  of  equipment  and  the
totality of involvements, it seems as if the Being of these entities has in fact

stratum.  But 

been clarified or has at least become a problem. But by taking extensio as a
proprietas,  Descartes  can  hardly  reach  the  Being  of  substance;  and  by
taking refuge in ‘value’-characteristics [“wertlichen” Beschaffenheiten] we
are just as far from even catching a glimpse of Being as readiness-to-hand,
let alone permitting it to become an ontological theme.

H. 100

 

Descartes has narrowed down the question of the world to that of Things
of  Nature  [Naturdinglichkeit]  as  those  entities  within-the-world  which  are
proximally accessible. He has confirmed the opinion that to know an entity
in what is supposedly the most rigorous ontical manner is our only possible
access  to  the  primary  Being  of  the  entity  which  such  knowledge  reveals.
But  at  the  same  time  we  must  have  the  insight  to  see  that  in  principle  the
‘roundings-out’  of  the  Thing-ontology  also  operate  on  the  same  dogmatic
basis as that which Descartes has adopted.

We have already intimated in Section 14 that passing over the world and
those  entities  which  we  proximally  encounter  is  not  accidental,  not  an
oversight  which  it  would  be  simple  to  correct,  but  that  it  is  grounded  in  a
kind of Being which belongs essentially to Dasein itself. When our analytic
of Dasein has given some transparency to those main structures of Dasein
which are of the most importance in the framework of this problematic, and
when we have assigned [zugewiesen] to the concept of Being in general the
horizon within which its intelligibility becomes possible, so that readiness-
to-hand  and  presence-at-hand  also  become  primordially 
intelligible
ontologically for the first time, only then can our critique of the Cartesian
ontology of the world (an ontology which, in principle, is still the usual one
today) come philosophically into its own.

To do this, we must show several things. (See Part One, Division Three.)

(1)

1. Why was the phenomenon of the world passed over at the beginning
of the ontological tradition which has been decisive for us (explicitly in the
case  of  Parmenides),  and  why  has  this  passing-over  kept  constantly
recurring?

2.  Why  is  it  that,  instead  of  the  phenomenon  thus  passed  over,  entities

within-the-world have intervened as an ontological theme?(2)

3. Why are these entities found in the first instance in ‘Nature’?

4. Why has recourse been taken to the phenomenon of value when it has

seemed necessary to round out such an ontology of the world?
 

1. This Division has never been published.
2. ‘Warum springt für das übersprungene Phänomen das innerweltlich Seiende als ontologisches
Thema ein?’ The verbal play on ‘überspringen’ (‘pass over’) and ‘einspringen’ (‘intervene’ or ‘serve
as a deputy’) is lost in translation. On ‘einspringen’ see our note 1, H. 122 below.

In  the  answers  to  these  questions  a  positive  understanding  of  the
problematic  of  the  world  will  be  reached  for  the  first  time,  the  sources  of
our failure to recognize it will be exhibited, and the ground for rejecting the
traditional ontology of the world will have been demonstrated.

H. 101

 

The world and Dasein and entities within-the-world are the ontologically
constitutive states which are closest to us; but we have no guarantee that we
can  achieve  the  basis  for  meeting  up  with  these  as  phenomena  by  the
seemingly obvious procedure of starting with the Things of the world, still
less  by  taking  our  orientation  from  what  is  supposedly  the  most  rigorous
knowledge of entities. Our observations on Descartes should have brought
us this insight.

But  if  we  recall  that  spatiality  is  manifestly  one  of  the  constituents  of
entities  within-the-world,  then  in  the  end  the  Cartesian  analysis  of  the
‘world’  can still  be ‘rescued’. When Descartes was  so radical as to  set up
the extensio  as  the  praesuppositum for  every  definite  characteristic  of  the
res  corporea,  he  prepared  the  way  for  the  understanding  of  something  a
priori whose content Kant was to establish with greater penetration. Within
certain  limits  the  analysis  of  the  extensio  remains  independent  of  his
neglecting  to  provide  an  explicit  interpretation  for  the  Being  of  extended
entities. There is some phenomenal justification for regarding the extensio
as  a  basic  characteristic  of  the  ‘world’,  even  if  by  recourse  to  this  neither
the  spatiality  of  the  world  nor  that  of  the  entities  we  encounter  in  our
environment (a spatiality which is proximally discovered) nor even that of
Dasein itself, can be conceived ontologically.

C. The Aroundness of the Environment and Dasein’s Spatiality

 

 

 

1. ‘Das Umhafte der Umwelt’. See our note 1, H. 65 above.

H. 102

In connection with our first preliminary sketch of Being-in (See Section
12), we had to contrast Dasein with a way of Being in space which we call
“insideness” [Inwendigkeit]. This expression means that an entity which is
itself extended is closed round [umschlossen] by the extended boundaries of
something  that  is  likewise  extended.  The  entity  inside  [Das  inwendig
Seiende] and that which closes it round are  both  present-at-hand  in  space.
Yet  even  if  we  deny  that  Dasein  has  any  such  insideness  in  a  spatial
receptacle, this does not in principle exclude it from having any spatiality at
all, but merely keeps open the way for seeing the kind of spatiality which is
constitutive  for  Dasein.  This  must  now  be  set  forth.  But  inasmuch  as  any
entity  within-the-world  is  likewise  in  space,  its  spatiality  will  have  an
ontological  connection  with  the  world.  We  must  therefore  determine  in
what  sense  space  is  a  constituent  for  that  world  which  has  in  turn  been
characterized as an item in the structure of Being-in-the-world. In particular
we  must  show  how  the  aroundness  of  the  environment,  the  specific
spatiality  of  entities  encountered  in  the  environment,  is  founded  upon  the
worldhood  of  the  world,  while  contrariwise  the  world,  on  its  part,  is  not
present-at-hand  in  space.  Our  study  of  Dasein’s  spatiality  and  the  way  in
which  the  world  is  spatially  determined  will  take  its  departure  from  an
analysis  of  what  is  ready-to-hand  in  space  within-the-world.  We  shall
consider three topics: 1. the spatiality of the ready-to-hand within-the-world
(Section 22); 2.  the  spatiality  of Being-in-the-world  (Section  23);  3.  space
and the spatiality of Dasein (Section 24).

22. The Spatiality of the Ready-to-hand Within-the-world

If  space  is  constitutive  for  the  world  in  a  sense  which  we  have  yet  to
determine,  then  it  cannot  surprise  us  that  in  our  foregoing  ontological
characterization  of  the  Being  of  what  is  within-the-world  we  have  had  to
look upon this as something that is also within space. This spatiality of the
ready-to-hand  is  something  which  we  have  not  yet  grasped  explicitly  as  a

phenomenon; nor have we pointed out how it is bound up with the structure
of Being which belongs to the ready-to-hand. This is now our task.

To  what  extent  has  our  characterization  of  the  ready-to-hand  already
come  up  against  its  spatiality?  We  have  been  talking  about  what  is
proximally  ready-to-hand.  This  means  not  only  those  entities  which  we
encounter  first  before  any  others,  but  also  those  which  are  ‘close  by’.(1)
What  is  ready-to-hand  in  our  everyday  dealings  has  the  character  of
closeness.  To  be  exact,  this  closeness  of  equipment  has  already  been
intimated  in  the  term  ‘readiness-to-hand’,  which  expresses  the  Being  of
equipment. Every entity that is ‘to hand’ has a different closeness, which is
not to be ascertained by measuring distances. This closeness regulates itself
in  terms  of  circumspectively  ‘calculative’  manipulating  and  using.  At  the
same time what is close in this way gets established by the circumspection
of concern, with regard to the direction in which the equipment is accessible
at  any  time.  When  this  closeness  of  the  equipment  has  been  given
directionality,(2) this signifies not merely that the equipment has its position
[Stelle] in space as present-at-hand somewhere, but also that as equipment
it  has  been  essentially  fitted  up  and  installed,  set  up,  and  put  to  rights.
Equipment  has  its  place  [Platz],  or  else  it  ‘lies  around’;  this  must  be
distinguished  in  principle  from  just  occurring  at  random  in  some  spatial
position.  When  equipment  for  something  or  other  has  its  place,  this  place
defines  itself  as  the  place  of  this  equipment—as  one  place  out  of  a  whole
totality of places directionally lined up with each other and belonging to the
context  of  equipment  that  is  environmentally  ready-to-hand.  Such  a  place
and such a muliplicity of places are not to be interpreted as the “where” of
some random Being-present-at-hand of Things. In each case the place is the
definite  ‘there’  or  ‘yonder’  [“Dort”  und  “Da”]  of  an  item  of  equipment
which belongs somewhere.
 

1. ‘in der Nähe.’ While the noun ‘Nähe’ often means the ‘closeness’ or ‘nearness’ of something
that is close to us, it can also stand for our immediate ‘vicinity’, as in the present expression, and in
many passages it can be interpreted either way. We shall in general translate it as ‘closeness’, but we
shall translate ‘in der Nähe’ and similar phrases as ‘close by’.

2. ‘Die ausgerichtete Nähe des Zeugs...’ The verb ‘ausrichten’ has many specialized meanings—
to ‘align’ a row of troops, to ‘explore’ a mine, to ‘make arrangements’ for something, to ‘carry out’ a
commission, etc. Heidegger, however, keeps its root meaning in mind and associates it with the word
‘Richtung’ (‘direction’, ‘route to be taken’, etc.). We shall accordingly translate it as a rule by some
form  of  the  verb  ‘direct’  (which  will  also  be  used  occasionally  for  the  verb  ‘richten’),  or  by  some
compound expression involving the word ‘directional’. For further discussion, see H. 108 ff. below.

H. 103

 

Its  belonging-somewhere  at  the  time  [Die  jeweilige  Hingehörigheit]
corresponds to the equipmental character of what is ready-to-hand; that is, it
corresponds  to  the  belonging-to  [Zugehörigkeit]  which  the  ready-to-hand
has  towards  a  totality  of  equipment  in  accordance  with  its  involvements.
But in general the “whither” to which the totality of places for a context of
equipment gets allotted,  is  the  underlying  condition which makes possible
the belonging-somewhere of an equipmental totality as something that can
be placed. This “whither”, which makes it possible for equipment to belong
somewhere, and which we circumspectively keep in view ahead of us in our
concernful dealings, we call the “region”.(1)

‘In the region of’ means not only ‘in the direction of’ but also within the
range [Umkreis] of something that lies in that direction. The kind of place
which is constituted by direction and remoteness(2) (and closeness is only a
mode of the latter) is already oriented towards a region and oriented within
it.  Something  like  a  region  must  first  be  discovered  if  there  is  to  be  any
possibility of allotting or coming across  places for  a totality of equipment
that  is  circumspectively  at  one’s  disposal.  The  regional  orientation  of  the
multiplicity  of  places  belonging  to  the  ready-to-hand  goes  to  make  up  the
aroundness—the  “round-about-us”  [das  Um-uns-herum]—of  those  entities
which  we  encounter  as  closest  environmentally.  A  three-dimensional
multiplicity of possible positions which gets filled up with Things present-
at-hand  is  never  proximally  given.  This  dimensionality  of  space  is  still
veiled in the spatiality of the ready-to-hand. The ‘above’ is what is ‘on the
ceiling’; the ‘below’ is what is ‘on the floor’; the ‘behind’ is what is ‘at the
door’;  all “wheres” are  discovered and circumspectively interpreted  as we
go our ways in everyday dealings; they are not ascertained and catalogued
by the observational measurement of space.
 

1.  ‘Gegend’.  There  is  no  English  word  which  quite  corresponds  to  ‘Gegend’.  ‘Region’  and
‘whereabouts’  perhaps  come  the  closest,  and  we  have  chosen  the  former  as  the  more  convenient.
(Heidegger  himself  frequently  uses  the  word  ‘Region’,  but  he  does  so  in  contexts  where  ‘realm’
seems  to  be  the  most  appropriate  translation;  we  have  usually  so  translated  it,  leaving  the  English
‘region’ for ‘Gegend’.)

2. ‘Entferntheit’. For further discussion, see Section 23 and our note 2, H. 105.

H. 104

 

Regions  are  not  first  formed  by  things  which  are  present-at-hand
together; they always are ready-to-hand already in individual places. Places
themselves either get allotted to the ready-to-hand in the circumspection of
concern, or we come across them. Thus anything constantly ready-to-hand
of which circumspective Being-in-the-world takes account beforehand, has
its place. The “where” of its readiness-to-hand is put to account as a matter
for  concern,  and  oriented  towards  the  rest  of  what  is  ready-to-hand.  Thus
the sun, whose light and warmth are in everyday use, has its own places—
sunrise,  midday,  sunset,  midnight;  these  are  discovered  in  circumspection
and treated distinctively in terms of changes in the usability of what the sun
bestows.  Here  we  have  something  which  is  ready-to-hand  with  uniform
constancy,  although  it  keeps  changing;  its  places  become  accentuated
‘indicators’ of the regions which lie in them. These celestial regions, which
need  not  have  any  geographical  meaning  as  yet,  provide  the  “whither”
beforehand  for  every(1)  special  way  of  giving  form  to  the  regions  which
places can occupy. The house has its sunny side and its shady side; the way
it is divided up into ‘rooms’ [“Räume”] is oriented towards these, and so is
the ‘arrangement’ [“Einrichtung”] within them, according to their character
as equipment. Churches and graves, for instance, are laid out according to
the  rising  and  the  setting  of  the  sun—the  regions  of  life  and  death,  which
are determinative for Dasein itself with regard to its ownmost possibilities
of Being in the world. Dasein, in its very Being, has this Being as an issue;
and  its  concern  discovers  beforehand  those  regions  in  which  some
involvement  is  decisive.  This  discovery  of  regions  beforehand  is  co-
determined  [mitbestimmt]  by  the  totality  of  involvements  for  which  the
ready-to-hand, as something encountered, is freed.

The readiness-to-hand which belongs to any such region beforehand has
the  character  of  inconspicuous  familiarity,  and  it  has  it  in  an  even  more
primordial sense than does the Being of the ready-to-hand.(2)
 

1. Reading ‘jede’ with the later editions. The earliest editions have ‘je’, which has been corrected

in the list of errata.

2.  ‘Die  vorgängige  Zuhandenheit  der  jeweiligen  Gegend  hat  in  einem  noch  ursprünglicheren
Sinne als das Sein des Zuhandenen den Charakter  der  unauffälligen  Vertrautheit.’ Here  the  phrase
‘als  das  Sein  des  Zuhandenen’  is  ambiguously  placed.  In  the  light  of  Section  16  above,  we  have
interpreted ‘als’ as ‘than’ rather than ‘as’, and have treated ‘das Sein’ as a nominative rather than an
accusative. But other readings are grammatically just as possible.

The  region  itself  becomes  visible  in  a  conspicuous  manner  only  when
one  discovers  the  ready-to-hand  circumspectively  and  does  so  in  the
deficient modes of concern.(1) Often the region of a place does not become
accessible explicitly as such a region until one fails to find something in its
place. The space which is discovered in circumspective Being-in-the-world
as  the  spatiality  of  the  totality  of  equipment,  always  belongs  to  entities
themselves as the place of that totality. The bare space itself is still veiled
over.  Space  has  been  split  up  into  places.  But  this  spatiality  has  its  own
unity  through  that  totality-of-involvements  in-accordance-with-the-world
[weltmässige]  which  belongs 
ready-to-hand.  The
‘environment’  does  not  arrange  itself  in  a  space  which  has  been  given  in
advance;  but  its  specific  worldhood,  in  its  significance,  Articulates  the
context  of  involvements  which  belongs  to  some  current  totality  of
circumspectively  allotted  places.  The  world  at  such  a  time  always  reveals
the  spatiality  of  the  space  which  belongs  to  it.  To  encounter  the  ready-to-
hand  in  its  environmental  space  remains  ontically  possible  only  because
Dasein itself is ‘spatial’ with regard to its Being-in-the-world.

the  spatially 

to 

23. The Spatiality of Being-in-the-world

 

 

H. 105

If  we  attribute  spatiality  to  Dasein,  then  this  ‘Being  in  space’  must
manifestly  be  conceived  in  terms  of  the  kind  of  Being  which  that  entity
possesses.  Dasein  is  essentially  not  a  Being-present-at-hand;  and  its
“spatiality” cannot signify anything like occurrence at a position in ‘world-
space’, nor can it signify Being-ready-to-hand at some place. Both of these
are  kinds  of  Being  which  belong  to  entities  encountered  within-the-world.
Dasein,  however,  is  ‘in’  the  world  in  the  sense  that  it  deals  with  entities
encountered  within-the-world,  and  does  so  concernfully  and  with
familiarity.  So  if  spatiality  belongs  to  it  in  any  way,  that  is  possible  only
because  of  this  Being-in.  But  its  spatiality  shows  the  characters  of  de-
severance and directionality.(2)
 

1. ‘Sie wird selbst nur sichtbar in der Weise des Auffallens bei einem umsichtigen Entdecken des
Zuhandenen und zwar in den defizienten Modi des Besorgens.’ This sentence too is ambiguous. The
pronoun  ‘Sie’  may  refer  either  to  the  region,  as  we  have  suggested,  or  to  its  readiness-to-hand.

Furthermore, while we have taken ‘nur sichtbar in der Weise des Auffallens’ as a unit, it is possible
that ‘in der Weise des Auffallens’ should be construed as going with the words that follow. In this
case  we  should  read:  ‘...becomes  visible  only  when  it  becomes  conspicuous  in  our  circumspective
discovery of the ready-to-hand, and indeed in the deficient modes of concern.’

2.  ‘Ent-fernung  und  Ausrichtung.’  The  nouns  ‘Entfernung’  and  ‘Entfernheit’  can  usually  be
translated  by  ‘removing’,  ‘removal’,  ‘remoteness’,  or  even  ‘distance’.  In  this  passage,  however,
Heidegger is calling attention to the fact that these words are derived from the stem ‘fern-’ (‘far’ or
‘distant’)  and  the  privative  prefix  ‘ent-’.  Usually  this  prefix  would  be  construed  as  merely
intensifying the notion of separation or distance expressed in the ‘fern-’; but Heidegger chooses to
construe it as more strictly privative, so that the verb ‘entfernen’ will be taken to mean abolishing a
distance or farness rather than enhancing it. It is as if by the very act of recognizing the ‘remoteness’
of something, we have in a sense brought it closer and made it less ‘remote’.

Apparently  there  is  no  word  in  English  with  an  etymological  structure  quite  parallel  to  that  of
‘entfernen’;  perhaps  ‘dissever’  comes  the  nearest,  for  this  too  is  a  verb  of  separation  in  which  a
privative prefix is used as an intensive. We have coined the similar verb ‘desever’ in the hope that
this  will  suggest  Heidegger’s  meaning  when  ‘remove’  and  its  derivatives  seem  inappropriate.  But
with ‘desever’, one cannot slip back and forth from one sense to another as easily as one can with
‘entfernen’;  so  we  have  resorted  to  the  expedient  of  using  both  ‘desever’  and  ‘remove’  and  their
derivatives,  depending  upon  the  sense  we  feel  is  intended.  Thus  ‘entfernen’  will  generally  be
rendered by ‘remove’ or ‘desever’, ‘entfernt’ by ‘remote’ or ‘desevered’. Since Heidegger is careful
to distinguish ‘Entfernung’ and ‘Entferntheit’, we shall usually translate these by ‘deseverance’ and
‘remoteness’ respectively; in the few cases where these translations do not seem appropriate, we shall
subjoin the German word in brackets.

Our  problem  is  further  complicated  by  Heidegger’s  practise  of  occasionally  putting  a  hyphen
after the prefix ‘ent-’, presumably to emphasize its privative character. In such cases we shall write
‘de-sever’,  ‘de-severance’,  etc.  Unfortunately,  however,  there  are  typographical  discrepancies
between the earlier and later editions. Some of the earlier hyphens occur at the ends of lines and have
been either intentionally or inadvertently omitted in resetting the type; some appear at the end of the
line  in  the  later  editions,  but  not  in  the  earlier  ones;  others  have  this  position  in  both  editions.  We
shall indicate each of these ambiguous cases with an asterisk, supplying a hyphen only if there seems
to be a good reason for doing so.

On ‘Ausrichtung’ see our note 2, H. 102 above.

When  we  speak  of  deseverance  as  a  kind  of  Being  which  Dasein  has
with regard to its Being-in-the-world, we do not understand by it any such
thing  as  remoteness  (or  closeness)  or  even  a  distance.(1)  We  use  the
expression  “deseverance”*  in  a  signification  which  is  both  active  and
transitive. It stands for a constitutive state of Dasein’s Being—a state with
regard to which removing something in the sense of putting it away is only
a determinate factical mode. “De-severing”* amounts to making the farness
vanish—that is, making the remoteness of something disappear, bringing it
close.(2) Dasein is essentially de-severant: it lets any entity be encountered
close by as the entity which it is. De-severance discovers remoteness; and
remoteness,  like  distance,  is  a  determinate  categorial  characteristic  of
entities whose nature is not that of Dasein. De-severance*, however, is an

existentiale; this  must  be  kept  in  mind.  Only  to  the  extent  that  entities  are
revealed for Dasein in their deseveredness [Entferntheit], do ‘remotenesses’
[“Entfernungen”]  and  distances  with  regard  to  other  things  become
accessible  in  entities  within-the-world  themselves.  Two  points  are  just  as
little desevered from one another as two Things, for neither of these types
of entity has the kind of Being which would make it capable of desevering.
They merely have a measurable distance between them, which we can come
across in our de-severing.

Proximally  and  for  the  most  part,  de-severing(3)  is  a  circumspective
bringing-close—bringing  something  close  by,  in  the  sense  of  procuring  it,
putting it in readiness, having it to hand. But certain ways in which entities
are  discovered  in  a  purely  cognitive  manner  also  have  the  character  of
bringing  them  close.  In  Dasein  there  lies  an  essential  tendency  towards
closeness. All the ways in which we speed things up, as we are more or less
compelled  to  do  today,  push  us  on  towards  the  conquest  of  remoteness.
With  the  ‘radio’,  for  example,  Dasein  has  so  expanded  its  everyday
environment that it has accomplished a de-severance of the ‘world’—a de-
severance which, in its meaning for Dasein, cannot yet be visualized.
 

1. ‘Abstand’. Heidegger uses three words which might be translated as ‘distance’: ‘Ferne’ (our
‘farness’), ‘Entfernung’ (our ‘deseverance’), and ‘Abstand’ (‘distance’ in the sense of a measurable
interval). We shall reserve ‘distance’ for ‘Abstand’.

2.  ‘Entfernen*  besagt  ein  Verschwindenmachen  der  Ferne,  d.  h.  der  Entferntheit  von  etwas,

3. This hyphen is found only in the later editions.

Näherung.’

H. 106

 

De-severing  does  not  necessarily  imply  any  explicit  estimation  of  the
farness  of  something  ready-to-hand  in  relation  to  Dasein.  Above  all,
remoteness* never gets taken as a distance. If farness is to be estimated, this
is  done  relatively  to  deseverances  in  which  everyday  Dasein  maintains
itself.  Though  these  estimates  may  be  imprecise  and  variable  if  we  try  to
compute  them,  in  the  everydayness  of  Dasein  they  have  their  own
definiteness which is thoroughly intelligible. We say that to go over yonder
is “a good walk”, “a stone’s throw”, or ‘as long as it takes to smoke a pipe’.
These  measures  express  not  only  that  they  are  not  intended  to  ‘measure’
anything  but  also  that  the  remoteness*  here  estimated  belongs  to  some
entity  to  which  one  goes  with  concernful  circumspection.  But  even  when

are 

estimated 

proximally 

we  avail  ourselves  of  a  fixed  measure  and  say  ‘it  is  half  an  hour  to  the
house’,  this  measure  must  be  taken  as  an  estimate.  ‘Half  an  hour’  is  not
thirty  minutes,  but  a  duration  [Dauer]  which  has  no  ‘length’  at  all  in  the
sense  of  a  quantitative  stretch.  Such  a  duration  is  always  interpreted  in
terms  of  well-accustomed  everyday  ways  in  which  we  ‘make  provision’
by
[“Besorgungen”].  Remotenesses* 
circumspection, even when one is quite familiar with ‘officially’ calculated
measures.  Since  what  is  de-severed  in  such  estimates  is  ready-to-hand,  it
retains its character as specifically within-the-world. This even implies that
the  pathways  we  take  towards  desevered  entities  in  the  course  of  our
dealings will vary in their length from day to day. What is ready-to-hand in
the  environment  is  certainly  not  present-at-hand  for  an  eternal  observer
exempt  from  Dasein:  but  it  is  encountered  in  Dasein’s  circumspectively
concernful  everydayness.  As  Dasein  goes  along  its  ways,  it  does  not
measure  off  a  stretch  of  space  as  a  corporeal  Thing  which  is  present-at-
hand; it does not ‘devour the kilometres’; bringing-close or de-severance is
always  a  kind  of  concernful  Being  towards  what  is  brought  close  and  de-
severed.  A  pathway  which  is  long  ‘Objectively’  can  be  much  shorter  than
one  which  is  ‘Objectively’  shorter  still  but  which  is  perhaps  ‘hard  going’
and  comes  before  us(1)  as  interminably  long.  Yet  only  in  thus  ‘coming
before  us’(1)  is  the  current  world  authentically  ready-to-hand.  The
Objective  distances  of  Things  present-at-hand  do  not  coincide  with  the
remoteness  and  closeness  of  what  is  ready-to-hand  within-the-world.
Though we may know these distances exactly, this knowledge still remains
blind;  it  does  not  have  the  function  of  discovering  the  environment
circumspectively and bringing it close; this knowledge is used only in and
for a concernful Being which does not measure stretches—a Being towards
the world that ‘matters’ to one [...Sein zu der einen “angehenden” Welt].

When  one  is  oriented  beforehand  towards  ‘Nature’  and  ‘Objectively’
measured distances of Things, one is inclined to pass off such estimates and
interpretations of deseverance as ‘subjective’. Yet this ‘subjectivity’ perhaps
uncovers  the  ‘Reality’  of  the  world  at  its  most  Real;  it  has  nothing  to  do
with  ‘subjective’  arbitrariness  or  subjectivistic  ‘ways  of  taking’  an  entity
which  ‘in  itself’  is  otherwise.  The  circumspective  de-severing  of  Dasein’s
everydayness  reveals  the  Being-in-itself  of  the  ‘true  world’—of  that  entity
which Dasein, as something existing, is already alongside.(2)
 

1. ‘vorkommt’; ‘ “Vorkommen” ’. In general ‘vorkommen’ may be translated as ‘occur’, and is to
be thought of as applicable strictly to the present-at-hand. In this passage, however, it is applied to
the  ready-to-hand;  and  a  translation  which  calls  attention  to  its  etymological  structure  seems  to  be
called for.

2.  ‘Das  umsichtige  Ent-fernen  der  Alltäglichkeit  des  Daseins  entdeckt  das  An-sich-sein  der

“wahren Welt”, des Seienden, bei dem Dasein als existierendes je schon ist.’

H. 107

 

When  one 

is  primarily  and  even  exclusively  oriented 

towards
remotenesses as measured distances, the primordial spatiality of Being-in is
concealed. That which is presumably ‘closest’ is by no means that which is
at  the  smallest  distance  ‘from  us’.  It  lies  in  that  which  is  desevered  to  an
average extent when we reach for it, grasp it, or look at it. Because Dasein
is  essentially  spatial  in  the  way  of  de-severance,  its  dealings  always  keep
within  an  ‘environment’  which  is  desevered  from  it  with  a  certain  leeway
[Spielraum];  accordingly  our  seeing  and  hearing  always  go  proximally
beyond what is distantially ‘closest’. Seeing and hearing are distance-senses
[Fernsinne] not because they are far-reaching, but because it is in them that
Dasein as deseverant mainly dwells. When, for instance, a man wears a pair
of spectacles which are so close to him distantially that they are ‘sitting on
his nose’, they are environmentally more remote from him than the picture
on the opposite wall. Such equipment has so little closeness that often it is
proximally  quite  impossible  to  find.  Equipment  for  seeing—and  likewise
for  hearing,  such  as  the  telephone  receiver—has  what  we  have  designated
as  the  inconspicuousness  of  the  proximally  ready-to-hand.  So  too,  for
instance, does the street, as equipment for walking. One feels the touch of it
at every step as one walks; it is seemingly the closest and Realest of all that
is  ready-to-hand,  and  it  slides  itself;  as  it  were,  along  certain  portions  of
one’s  body—the  soles  of  one’s  feet.  And  yet  it  is  farther  remote  than  the
acquaintance  whom  one  encounters  ‘on  the  street’  at  a  ‘remoteness’
[“Entfernung”]  of  twenty  paces  when  one  is  taking  such  a  walk.
Circumspective concern decides as to the closeness and farness of what is
proximally  ready-to-hand  environmentally.  Whatever  this  concern  dwells
alongside  beforehand  is  what  is  closest,  and  this  is  what  regulates  our  de-
severances.

If Dasein, in its concern, brings something close by, this does not signify
that  it  fixes  something  at  a  spatial  position  with  a  minimal  distance  from
some  point  of  the  body.  When  something  is  close  by,  this  means  that  it  is

within  the  range  of  what  is  proximally  ready-to-hand  for  circumspection.
Bringing-close is not oriented towards the I-Thing encumbered with a body,
but  towards  concernful  Being-in-the-world—that  is,  towards  whatever  is
proximally  encountered  in  such  Being.  It  follows,  moreover,  that  Dasein’s
spatiality is not to be defined by citing the position at which some corporeal
Thing  is  present-at-hand.  Of  course  we  say  that  even  Dasein  always
occupies  a  place.  But  this  ‘occupying’  must  be  distinguished  in  principle
from Being-ready-to-hand at a place in some particular region. Occupying a
place  must  be  conceived  as  a  desevering  of  the  environmentally  ready-to-
hand into a region which has been circumspectively discovered in advance.
Dasein understands its “here” [Hier] in terms of its environmental “yonder”.
The  “here”  does  not  mean  the  “where”  of  something  present-at-hand,  but
rather  the  “whereat”  [Wobei]  of  a  de-severant  Being-alongside,  together
with  this  de-severance.  Dasein,  in  accordance  with  its  spatiality,  is
proximally never here but yonder; from this “yonder” it comes back to its
“here”; and it comes back to its “here” only in the way in which it interprets
its concernful Being-towards in terms of what is ready-to-hand yonder. This
becomes quite plain if we consider a certain phenomenal peculiarity of the
de-severance structure of Being-in.

H. 108

 

As  Being-in-the-world,  Dasein  maintains  itself  essentially  in  a  de-
severing. This de-severance—the farness of the ready-to-hand from Dasein
itself—is  something  that  Dasein  can  never  cross  over.  Of  course  the
remoteness  of  something  ready-to-hand  from  Dasein  can  show  up  as  a
distance  from  it,(1)  if  this  remoteness  is  determined  by  a  relation  to  some
Thing  which  gets  thought  of  as  present-at-hand  at  the  place  Dasein  has
formerly occupied. Dasein can subsequently traverse the “between” of this
distance, but only in such a way that the distance itself becomes one which
has been desevered*. So little has Dasein crossed over its de-severance that
it has rather taken it along with it and keeps doing so constantly; for Dasein
is  essentially  de-severance—that  is,  it  is  spatial.  It  cannot  wander  about
within  the  current  range  of  its  de-severances;  it  can  never  do  more  than
change  them.  Dasein  is  spatial  in  that  it  discovers  space  circumspectively,
so  that  indeed  it  constantly  comports  itself  de-severantly*  towards  the
entities thus spatially encountered.

 

 

1. ‘...kann zwar selbst von diesem als Abstand vorfindlich werden...’

likewise 

As  de-severant  Being-in,  Dasein  has 

the  character  of
directionality.  Every  bringing-close  [Näherung]  has  already  taken  in
advance a direction towards a region out of which what is de-severed brings
itself  close  [sich  nähert],  so  that  one  can  come  across  it  with  regard  to  its
place. Circumspective concern is de-severing which gives directionality. In
this concern—that is, in the Being-in-the-world of Dasein itself—a supply
of  ‘signs’  is  presented.  Signs,  as  equipment,  take  over  the  giving  of
directions  in  a  way  which  is  explicit  and  easily  manipulable.  They  keep
explicitly open those regions which have been used circumspectively—the
particular “whithers” to which something belongs or goes, or gets brought
or fetched. If Dasein is, it already has, as directing and desevering, its own
discovered  region.  Both  directionality  and  de-severance,  as  modes  of
Being-in-the-world,  are  guided  beforehand  by  the  circumspection  of
concern.

H. 109

Out  of  this  directionality  arise  the  fixed  directions  of  right  and  left.
Dasein constantly takes these directions along with it, just as it does its de-
severances. Dasein’s spatialization in its ‘bodily nature’ is likewise marked
out in accordance with these directions. (This ‘bodily nature’ hides a whole
problematic of its own, though we shall not treat it here.) Thus things which
are ready-to-hand and used for the body—like gloves, for example, which
are to move with the hands—must be given directionality towards right and
left.  A  craftsman’s  tools,  however,  which  are  held  in  the  hand  and  are
moved with it, do not share the hand’s specifically ‘manual’ [“handliche”]
movements. So although hammers are handled just as much with the hand
as gloves are, there are no right- or left-handed hammers.

One  must  notice,  however,  that  the  directionality  which  belongs  to  de-
severance  is  founded  upon  Being-in-the-world.  Left  and  right  are  not
something  ‘subjective’  for  which  the  subject  has  a  feeling;  they  are
directions of one’s directedness into a world that is ready-to-hand already.
‘By  the  mere  feeling  of  a  difference  between  my  two  sides’(xxi)  I  could
never find my way about in a world. The subject with a ‘mere feeling’ of

this  difference  is  a  construct  posited  in  disregard  of  the  state  that  is  truly
constitutive  for  any  subject—namely,  that  whenever  Dasein  has  such  a
‘mere feeling’, it is in a world already and must be in it to be able to orient
itself at all. This becomes plain from the example with which Kant tries to
clarify the phenomenon of orientation.
 

xxi. Immanuel Kant: ‘Was Heisst: Sich im Denken orientieren?’ (1786) Werke (Akad. Ausgabe),

Vol. VIII, pp. 131—147.

H. 110

 

Suppose I step into a room which is familiar to me but dark, and which
has  been  rearranged  [umgeräumt]  during  my  absence  so  that  everything
which used to be at my right is now at my left. If I am to orient myself the
‘mere feeling of the difference’ between my two sides will be of no help at
all as long as I fail to apprehend some definite object ‘whose position’, as
Kant remarks casually, ‘I have in mind’. But what does this signify except
that whenever this happens I necessarily orient myself both  i n  and  f r o m
 my being already alongside a world which is ‘familiar’?(1) The equipment-
context of a world must have been presented to Dasein. That I am already in
a world is  no less constitutive  for  the  possibility of orientation than  is  the
feeling for right and left. While this state of Dasein’s Being is an obvious
one,  we  are  not  thereby  justified  in  suppressing  the  ontologically
constitutive role which it plays. Even Kant does not suppress it, any more
than  any  other  Interpretation  of  Dasein.  Yet  the  fact  that  this  is  a  state  of
which  we  constantly  make  use,  does  not  exempt  us  from  providing  a
suitable ontological explication, but rather demands one. The psychological
Interpretation  according  to  which  the  “I”  has  something  ‘in  the  memory’
[“im  Gedächtnis”]  is  at  bottom  a  way  of  alluding  to  the  existentially
constitutive  state  of  Being-in-the-world.  Since  Kant  fails  to  see  this
structure,  he  also  fails  to  recognize  all  the  interconnections  which  the
Constitution  of  any  possible  orientation  implies.  Directedness  with  regard
to  right  and  left  is  based  upon  the  essential  directionality  of  Dasein  in
general,  and  this  directionality  in  turn  is  essentially  co-determined  by
Being-in-the-world.  Even  Kant,  of  course,  has  not  taken  orientation  as  a
theme  for  Interpretation.  He  merely  wants  to  show  that  every  orientation
requires  a ‘subjective  principle’.  Here  ‘subjective’ is  meant  to  signify  that

this  principle  is  a  priori.(2)  Nevertheless,  the  a  priori  character  of
directedness  with  regard  to  right  and  left  is  based  upon  the  ‘subjective’  a
priori of Being-in-the-world, which has nothing to do with any determinate
character restricted beforehand to a worldless subject.

De-severance and directionality, as constitutive characteristics of Being-
in, are determinative for Dasein’s spatiality—for its being concernfully and
circumspectively  in  space,  in  a  space  discovered  and  within-the-world.
Only  the  explication  we  have  just  given  for  the  spatiality  of  the  ready-to-
hand within-the-world and the spatiality of Being-in-the-world, will provide
the prerequisites for working out the phenomenon of the world’s spatiality
and formulating the ontological problem of space.
 

1. ‘…in und aus einem je schon sein bei einer “bekannten” Welt.’ The earlier editions have ‘Sein’

for ‘sein’.

2. Here we follow the later editions in reading ‘...bedeuten wollen: a priori.’ The earlier editions

omit the colon, making the passage ambiguous.

24. Space and Dasein’s Spatiality

As  Being-in-the-world,  Dasein  has  already  discovered  a  ‘world’  at  any
time. This discovery, which is founded upon the worldhood of the world, is
one  which  we  have  characterized  as  freeing  entities  for  a  totality  of
involvements. Freeing something and letting it be involved, is accomplished
by way of referring or assigning oneself circumspectively, and this in turn is
based  upon  one’s  previously  understanding  significance.  We  have  now
shown that circumspective Being-in-the-world is spatial. And only because
Dasein is spatial in the way of de-severance and directionality can what is
ready-to-hand  within-the-world  be  encountered  in  its  spatiality.  To  free  a
totality of involvements is, equiprimordially, to let something be involved at
a region, and to do so by de-severing and giving directionality; this amounts
to  freeing  the  spatial  belonging-somewhere  of  the  ready-to-hand.  In  that
significance with which Dasein (as concernful Being-in) is familiar, lies the
essential co-disclosedness of space.(1)

H. 111

 

 

The space which is thus disclosed with the worldhood of the world still
lacks  the  pure  multiplicity  of  the  three  dimensions.  In  this  disclosedness
which is closest to us, space, as the pure “wherein” in which positions are
ordered  by  measurement  and  the  situations  of  things  are  determined,  still
remains hidden. In the phenomenon of the region we have already indicated
that on the basis of which space is discovered beforehand in Dasein. By a
‘region” we have understood the “whither” to which an equipment-context
ready-to-hand  might  possibly  belong,  when  that  context  is  of  such  a  sort
that  it  can  be  encountered  as  directionally  desevered—that  is,  as  having
been placed.(2) This belongingness [Gehörigkeit] is determined in terms of
the  significance  which  is  constitutive  for  the  world,  and  it  Articulates  the
“hither”  and  “thither”  within  the  possible  “whither”.  In  general  the
“whither” gets prescribed by a referential totality which has been made fast
in a “for-the-sake-of-which” of concern, and within which letting something
be  involved  by  freeing  it,  assigns  itself.  With  anything  encountered  as
ready-to-hand  there  is  always  an  involvement  in  [bei]  a  region.  To  the
totality  of  involvements  which  makes  up  the  Being  of  the  ready-to-hand
within-the-world,  there  belongs  a  spatial  involvement  which  has  the
character of a region. By reason of such an involvement, the ready-to-hand
becomes  something  which  we  can  come  across  and  ascertain  as  having
form and direction.(3) With the factical Being of Dasein, what is ready-to-
hand  within-the-world  is  desevered*  and  given  directionality,  depending
upon 
is  possible  for  concernful
circumspection.
 

the  degree  of 

transparency 

that 

1. ‘…die wesenhafte Miterschlossenheit des Raumes.’
2.  ‘Wir  verstehen  sie  als  das  Wohin  der  möglichen  Zugehörigkeit  des  zuhandenen

Zeugzusammenhanges, der als ausgerichtet entfernter, d. h. platzierter soll begegnen können.’

3.  ‘Auf  deren  Grunde  wird  das  Zuhandene  nach  Form  und  Richtung  vorfindlich  und
bestimmbar’. The earliest editions have ‘erfindlich’, which has been corrected to ‘vorfindlich’ in a
list of errata.

When we let entities within-the-world be encountered in the way which
is  constitutive  for  Being-in-the-world,  we  ‘give  them  space’.  This  ‘giving
space’,  which  we  also  call  ‘making room’ for  them,(1)  consists  in  freeing
the ready-to-hand for its spatiality. As a way of discovering and presenting
a possible totality of spaces determined by involvements, this making-room
is what makes possible one’s factical orientation at the time. In concerning
itself  circumspectively  with  the  world,  Dasein  can  move  things  around  or

out of the way or ‘make room’ for them [um-, weg-, und “einräumen”] only
because  making-room—understood  as  an  existentiale—belongs  to  its
Being-in-the-world.  But  neither  the  region  previously  discovered  nor  in
general  the  current  spatiality  is  explicitly  in  view.  In  itself  it  is  present
[zugegen]  for  circumspection  in  the  inconspicuousness  of  those  ready-to-
hand  things  in  which  that  circumspection  is  concernfully  absorbed.  With
Being-in-the-world, space is proximally discovered in this spatiality. On the
basis  of  the  spatiality  thus  discovered,  space  itself  becomes  accessible  for
cognition.
 

1. Both ‘Raum-geben’ (our ‘giving space’) and ‘Einräumen’ (our ‘making room’) are often used
in the metaphorical sense of ‘yielding’, ‘granting’, or ‘making concessions’. ‘Einräumen’ may also
be used for ‘arranging’ furniture, ‘moving it in’, or ‘stowing it away’.

Space is not in the subject, nor is the world in space. Space is rather ‘in’
the world in so far as space has been disclosed by that Being-in-the-world
which is constitutive for Dasein. Space is not to be found in the subject, nor
does the subject observe the world ‘as if’ that world were in a space; but the
‘subject’ (Dasein), if well understood ontologically, is spatial. And because
Dasein  is  spatial  in  the  way  we  have  described,  space  shows  itself  as  a
priori.  This  term  does  not  mean  anything  like  previously  belonging  to  a
subject which is proximally still worldless and which emits a space out of
itself. Here “apriority” means the previousness with which space has been
encountered  (as  a  region)  whenever  the  ready-to-hand  is  encountered
environmentally.

H. 112

 

The  spatiality  of  what  we  proximally  encounter  in  circumspection  can
become a theme for circumspection itself, as well as a task for calculation
and measurement, as in building and surveying. Such thematization of the
spatiality of the environment is still predominantly an act of circumspection
by which space in itself already comes into view in a certain way. The space
which thus shows itself can be studied purely by looking at it, if one gives
up  what  was  formerly  the  only  possibility  of  access  to  it—circumspective
calculation.  When  space  is  ‘intuited  formally’,  the  pure  possibilities  of
spatial relations are discovered. Here one may go through a series of stages
in laying bare pure homogeneous space, passing from the pure morphology

of spatial shapes to analysis situs and finally to the purely metrical science
of  space.  In  our  present  study  we  shall  not  consider  how  all  these  are
interconnected.(xxii)  Our  problematic  is  merely  designed  to  establish
ontologically the phenomenal basis upon which one can take the discovery
of pure space as a theme for investigation, and work it out.

When space is discovered non-circumspectively by just looking at it, the
environmental  regions  get  neutralized  to  pure  dimensions.  Places—and
indeed the  whole circumspectively oriented  totality of places belonging to
equipment  ready-to-hand—get  reduced  to  a  multiplicity  of  positions  for
random  Things.  The  spatiality  of  what  is  ready-to-hand  within-the-world
loses  its  involvement-character,  and  so  does  the  ready-to-hand.  The  world
loses its specific aroundness; the environment becomes the world of Nature.
The ‘world’, as a totality of equipment ready-to-hand, becomes spatialized
[verräumlicht]  to  a  context  of  extended  Things  which  are  just  present-at-
hand  and  no  more.  The  homogeneous  space  of  Nature  shows  itself  only
when  the  entities  we  encounter  are  discovered  in  such  a  way  that  the
worldly  character  of  the  ready-to-hand  gets  specifically  deprived  of  its
worldhood.(1)
 

xxii.  Cf.  O.  Becker,  Beiträge  zur  phänomenologischen  Begründung  der  Geometrie  und  ihrer
physikalischen  Anwendungen,  in  this  Yearbook  [Jahrbuch  für  Philosophie  und  Phänomenologische
Forschung], vol. VI (1923), pp. 385 ff.
 

1.  ‘…die  den  Charakter  einer  spezifischen  Entweltlichung der  Weltmässigkeit  des  Zuhandenen

hat.’

 

H. 113

In  accordance  with  its  Being-in-the-world,  Dasein  always  has  space
presented  as  already  discovered,  though  not  thematically.  On  the  other
hand, space in itself, so far as it embraces the mere possibilities of the pure
spatial  Being  of  something,  remains  proximally  still  concealed.  The  fact
that space essentially shows itself in a world is not yet decisive for the kind
of  Being  which  it  possesses.  It  need  not  have  the  kind  of  Being
characteristic  of  something  which  is  itself  spatially  ready-to-hand  or
present-at-hand. Nor does the Being of space have the kind of Being which
belongs to Dasein. Though the Being of space itself cannot be conceived as
the kind of Being which belongs to a res extensa, it does not follow that it

must  be  defined  ontologically  as  a  ‘phenomenon’  of  such  a  res.  (In  its
Being,  it  would  not  be  distinguished  from  such  a  res.) Nor  does  it  follow
that  the  Being  of  space  can  be  equated  to  that  of  the  res  cogitans  and
conceived  as  merely  ‘subjective’,  quite  apart  from  the  questionable
character of the Being of such a subject.

The  Interpretation  of  the  Being  of  space  has  hitherto  been  a  matter  of
perplexity,  not  so  much  because  we  have  been  insufficiently  acquainted
with  the  content  of  space  itself  as  a  thing  [des  Sachgehaltes  des  Raumes
selbst],  as  because  the  possibilities  of  Being  in  general  have  not  been  in
principle transparent, and an Interpretation of them in terms of ontological
concepts has been lacking. If we are to understand the ontological problem
of  space,  it  is  of  decisive  importance  that  the  question  of  Being  must  be
liberated  from  the  narrowness  of  those  concepts  of  Being  which  merely
chance to be available and which are for the most part rather rough; and the
problematic  of  the  Being  of  space  (with  regard  to  that  phenomenon  itself
and various phenomenal spatialities) must be turned in such a direction as
to clarify the possibilities of Being in general.

In  the  phenomenon  of  space  the  primary  ontological  character  of  the
Being of entities within-the-world is not to be found, either as unique or as
one  among  others.  Still  less  does  space  constitute  the  phenomenon  of  the
world. Unless we go back to the world, space cannot be conceived. Space
becomes  accessible  only  if  the  environment  is  deprived  of  its  worldhood;
and  spatiality  is  not  discoverable  at  all  except  on  the  basis  of  the  world.
Indeed space is still one of the things that is constitutive for the world, just
as  Dasein’s  own  spatiality  is  essential  to  its  basic  state  of  Being-in-the-
world.(1)
 

1.  ‘…so  zwar,  dass  der  Raum  die  Welt  doch  mitkonstituiert,  entsprechend  der  wesenhaften

Räumlichkeit des Daseins selbst hinsichtlich seiner Grundverfassung des In-der-Welt-seins.’

IV: BEING-IN-THE-WORLD AS BEING-WITH AND BEING-

ONE’S-SELF. THE “THEY”

 

 

H. 114

OUR  analysis  of  the  worldhood  of  the  world  has  constantly  been
bringing the whole phenomenon of Being-in-the-world into view, although
its  constitutive  items  have  not  all  stood  out  with  the  same  phenomenal
distinctness as the phenomenon of the world itself. We have Interpreted the
world  ontologically  by  going  through  what  is  ready-to-hand  within-the-
world;  and  this  Interpretation  has  been  put  first,  because  Dasein,  in  its
everydayness  (with  regard  to  which  Dasein  remains  a  constant  theme  for
study),  not  only  is  in  a  world  but  comports  itself  towards  that  world  with
one predominant kind of Being. Proximally and for the most part Dasein is
fascinated with its world. Dasein is thus absorbed in the world; the kind of
Being which it thus possesses, and in general the Being-in which underlies
it, are essential in determining the character of a phenomenon which we are
now about to study. We shall approach this phenomenon by asking who it is
that Dasein is in its everydayness. All the structures of Being which belong
to Dasein, together with the phenomenon which provides the answer to this
question  of  the  “who”,  are  ways  of  its  Being.  To  characterize  these
ontologically is to do so existentially. We must therefore pose the question
correctly  and  outline  the  procedure  for  bringing  into  view  a  broader
phenomenal domain of Dasein’s everydayness. By directing our researches
towards  the  phenomenon  which  is  to  provide  us  with  an  answer  to  the
question of the “who”, we shall be led to certain structures of Dasein which
are  equiprimordial  with  Being-in-the-world:  Being-with  and  Dasein-with
[Mitsein  und  Mitdasein].  In  this  kind  of  Being  is  grounded  the  mode  of
everyday  Being-one’s-Self  [Selbstsein];  the  explication  of  this  mode  will
enable  us  to  see  what  we  may  call  the  ‘subject’  of  everydayness—the
“they”. Our chapter on the ‘who’ of the average Dasein will thus be divided
up  as  follows:  1.  an  approach  to  the  existential  question  of  the  “who”  of
Dasein (Section 25); 2. the Dasein-with of Others, and everyday Being-with
(Section 26); 3. everyday Being-one’s-Self and the “they” (Section 27).

 

 

1.  ‘Das  Man’.  In  German  one  may  write  ‘man  glaubt’  where  in  French  one  would  write  ‘on
croit’, or in English ‘they believe’, ‘one believes’, or ‘it is believed’. But the German ‘man’ and the
French ‘on’ are specialized for such constructions in a way in which the pronouns ‘they’, ‘one’, and
‘it’ are not. There is accordingly no single idiomatic translation for the German ‘man’ which will not
sometimes lend itself to ambiguity, and in general we have chosen whichever construction seems the
most appropriate in its context. But when Heidegger introduces this word with a definite article and
writes  ‘das  Man’,  as  he  does  very  often  in  this  chapter,  we  shall  translate  this  expression  as  ‘the
“they” ’, trusting that the reader will not take this too literally.

25. An Approach to the Existential Question of the “Who” of Dasein

The answer to the question of who Dasein is, is one that was seemingly
given in Section 9, where we indicated formally the basic characteristics of
Dasein. Dasein is  an entity which is  in  each case  I  myself; its Being  is  in
each case mine. This definition indicates an ontologically constitutive state,
but it does no more than indicate it. At the same time this tells us ontically
(though in a rough and ready fashion) that in each case an “I”—not Others
—is this entity. The question of the “who” answers itself in terms of the “I”
itself,  the  ‘subject’,  the  ‘Self’.(1)  The  “who”  is  what  maintains  itself  as
something  identical  throughout  changes  in  its  Experiences  and  ways  of
behaviour, and which relates itself to this changing multiplicity in so doing.
Ontologically we understand it as something which is in each case already
constantly present-at-hand, both in and for a closed realm, and which lies at
the basis, in a very special sense, as the subjectum. As something selfsame
in manifold otherness,(2) it has the character of the Self. Even if one rejects
the “soul substance” and the Thinghood of consciousness, or denies that a
person  is  an  object,  ontologically  one  is  still  positing  something  whose
Being retains the meaning of present-at-hand, whether it does so explicitly
or not. Substantiality is the ontological clue for determining which entity is
to  provide  the  answer  to  the  question  of  the  “who”.  Dasein  is  tacitly
conceived in advance as something present-at-hand. This meaning of Being
is  always  implicated  in  any  case  where  the  Being  of  Dasein  has  been  left
indefinite.  Yet  presence-at-hand  is  the  kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to
entities whose character is not that of Dasein.
 

1. ‘dem “Selbst” ’. While we shall ordinarily translate the intensive ‘selbst’ by the corresponding
English  intensives  ‘itself’,  ‘oneself’,  ‘myself’,  etc.,  according  to  the  context,  we  shall  translate  the
substantive ‘Selbst’ by the substantive ‘Self’ with a capital.

2. ‘…als Selbiges in der vielfältigen Andersheit…’ While the words ‘identisch’ and ‘selbig’ are
virtually  synonyms  in  ordinary  German,  Heidegger  seems  to  be  intimating  a  distinction  between
them. We shall accordingly translate the former by ‘identical’ and the latter by ‘selfsame’ to show its
etymological connection with ‘selbst’. Cf. H. 130 below.

H. 115

 

The assertion that it is I who in each case Dasein is, is ontically obvious;
but this must not mislead us into supposing that the route for an ontological
Interpretation  of  what  is  ‘given’  in  this  way  has  thus  been  unmistakably
prescribed.  Indeed  it  remains  questionable  whether  even  the  mere  ontical
content  of  the  above  assertion  does  proper  justice  to  the  stock  of
phenomena  belonging  to  everyday  Dasein.  It  could  be  that  the  “who”  of
everyday Dasein just is not the “I myself”.

If,  in  arriving  at  ontico-ontological  assertions,  one  is  to  exhibit  the
phenomena  in  terms  of  the  kind  of  Being  which  the  entities  themselves
possess, and if this way of exhibiting them is to retain its priority over even
the  most  usual  and  obvious  of  answers  and  over  whatever  ways  of
formulating problems may have been derived from those answers, then the
phenomenological  Interpretation  of  Dasein  must  be  defended  against  a
perversion of our problematic when we come to the question we are about
to formulate.

But  is  it  not  contrary  to  the  rules  of  all  sound  method  to  approach  a
problematic without sticking to what is given as evident in the area of our
theme?  And  what  is  more  indubitable  than  the  givenness  of  the  “I”?  And
does not this givenness tell us that if we aim to work this out primordially,
we must disregard everything else that is ‘given’—not only a ‘world’ that is
[einer  seienden  “Welt”],  but  even  the  Being  of  other  ‘I’s?  The  kind  of
“giving” we have here is the mere, formal, reflective awareness of the “I”;
and  perhaps  what  it  gives  is  indeed  evident.(1)  This  insight  even  affords
access  to  a  phenomenological  problematic  in  its  own  right,  which  has  in
principle  the  signification  of  providing  a  framework  as  a  ‘formal
phenomenology of consciousness’.
 

1.  ‘Vielleicht  ist  in  der  Tat  das,  was  diese  Art  von  Gebung,  das  schlichte,  formale,  reflektive

Ichvernehmen gibt, evident.’

H. 116

 

In this context of an existential analytic of factical Dasein, the question
arises  whether  giving  the  “I”  in  the  way  we  have  mentioned  discloses
Dasein in its everydayness, if it discloses Dasein at all. Is it then obvious a
priori  that  access  to  Dasein  must  be  gained  only  by  mere  reflective
awareness of the “I” of actions? What if this kind of ‘giving-itself’ on the
part of Dasein should lead our existential analytic astray and do so, indeed,
in a manner grounded in the Being of Dasein itself? Perhaps when Dasein
addresses  itself  in  the  way  which  is  closest  to  itself;  it  always  says  “I  am
this entity”, and in the long run says this loudest when it is ‘not’ this entity.
Dasein  is  in  each  case  mine,  and  this  is  its  constitution;  but  what  if  this
should be the very reason why, proximally and for the most part, Dasein is
not itself? What if the aforementioned approach, starting with the givenness
of  the  “I”  to  Dasein  itself;  and  with  a  rather  patent  self-interpretation  of
Dasein, should lead the existential analytic, as it were, into a pitfall? If that
which  is  accessible  by  mere  “giving”  can  be  determined,  there  is
presumably  an  ontological  horizon  for  determining  it;  but  what  if  this
horizon should remain in principle undetermined? It may well be that it is
always  ontically  correct  to  say  of  this  entity  that  ‘I’  am  it.  Yet  the
ontological analytic which makes use of such assertions must make certain
reservations about them in principle. The word ‘I’ is to be understood only
in  the  sense  of  a  non-committal  formal  indicator,  indicating  something
which  may  perhaps  reveal  itself  as  its  ‘opposite’  in  some  particular
phenomenal  context  of  Being.  In  that  case,  the  ‘not-I’  is  by  no  means
tantamount to an entity which essentially lacks ‘I-hood’ [“Ichheit”], but is
rather a definite kind of Being which the ‘I’ itself possesses, such as having
lost itself [Selbstverlorenheit].

Yet  even  the  positive  Interpretation  of  Dasein  which  we  have  so  far
given, already forbids us to start with the formal givenness of the “I”, if our
purpose  is  to  answer  the  question  of  the  “who”  in  a  way  which  is
phenomenally  adequate.  In  clarifying  Being-in-the-world  we  have  shown
that  a  bare  subject  without  a  world  never  ‘is’  proximally,  nor  is  it  ever
given. And so in the end an isolated “I” without Others is just as far from
being proximally given.(i) If, however, ‘the Others’ already are there with
us  [mit  da  sind]  in  Being-in-the-world,  and  if  this  is  ascertained
phenomenally,  even  this  should  not  mislead  us  into  supposing  that  the
ontological  structure  of  what  is  thus  ‘given’  is  obvious,  requiring  no

investigation.  Our  task  is  to  make  visible  phenomenally  the  species  to
which this Dasein-with in closest everydayness belongs, and to Interpret it
in a way which is ontologically appropriate.

Just  as  the  ontical  obviousness  of  the  Being-in-itself  of  entities  within-
the-world misleads us into the conviction that the meaning of this Being is
obvious  ontologically,  and  makes  us  overlook  the  phenomenon  of  the
world, the ontical obviousness of the fact that Dasein is in each case mine,
also hides the possibility that the ontological problematic which belongs to
it has been led astray. Proximally the “who” of Dasein is not only a problem
ontologically; even ontically it remains concealed.

H. 117

 

But  does  this  mean  that  there  are  no  clues  whatever  for  answering  the
question of the “who” by way of existential analysis? Certainly not. Of the
ways in which we formally, indicated the constitution of Dasein’s Being in
Sections  9  and  12  above,  the  one  we  have  been  discussing  does  not,  of
course, function so well as such a clue as does the one according to which
Dasein’s ‘Essence’ is grounded in its existence.(1) If the ‘I’ is an Essential
characteristic  of  Dasein,  then  it  is  one  which  must  be  Interpreted
existentially. In that case the “Who?” is to be answered only by exhibiting
phenomenally a definite kind of Being which Dasein possesses.
 

i.  Cf.  what  Max  Scheler  has  pointed  out  phenomenologically  in  his  Zur  Phänomenologie  und
Theorie der Sympathiegefühle, 1913, Anhang, pp. 118 ff.; see also his second edition under the title
Wesen und Formen der Sympathie, 1923, pp. 244 ff.
 

1. ‘as such a clue’: here we read ‘als solcher’, following the later editions. The earliest editions

have ‘als solche’, which has been corrected in the list of errata.

“Essence”:  while  we  ordinarily  use  ‘essence’  and  ‘essential’  to  translate  ‘Wesen’  and
‘wesenhaft’, we shall use ‘Essence’ and “Essential’ (with initial capitals) to translate the presumably
synonymous but far less frequent ‘Essenz’ and ‘essentiell’.

The two ‘formal indications’ to which Heidegger refers are to be found on H. 42 above.

If in each case Dasein is its Self only in existing, then the constancy of
the  Self  no  less  than  the  possibility  of  its  ‘failure  to  stand  by  itself’(1)
requires  that  we  formulate  the  question  existentially  and  ontologically  as
the sole appropriate way of access to its problematic.

tantamount 

to  volatilizing 

But if the Self is conceived ‘only’ as a way of Being of this entity, this
seems 
the  real  ‘core’  of  Dasein.  Any
apprehensiveness  however  which  one  may  have  about  this  gets  its
nourishment from the perverse assumption that the entity in question has at
bottom the kind of Being which belongs to something present-at-hand, even
if  one  is  far  from  attributing  to  it  the  solidity  of  an  occurrent  corporeal
Thing. Yet man’s ‘substance’ is not spirit as a synthesis of soul and body; it
is rather existence.

26. The Dasein-with of Others and Everyday Being-with

 

The  answer  to  the  question  of  the  “who”  of  everyday  Dasein  is  to  be
obtained  by  analysing  that kind  of Being  in  which Dasein maintains itself
proximally  and  for  the  most  part.  Our  investigation  takes  its  orientation
from Being-in-the-world—that basic state of Dasein by which every mode
of  its  Being  gets  co-determined.  If  we  are  correct  in  saying  that  by  the
foregoing explication of the world, the remaining structural items of Being-
in-the-world have become visible, then this must also have prepared us, in a
way, for answering the question of the “who”.

In  our  ‘description’  of  that  environment  which  is  closest  to  us—the
work-world  of  the  craftsman,  for  example,—the  outcome  was  that  along
with  the  equipment  to  be  found  when  one  is  at  work  [in  Arbeit],  those
Others for whom the ‘work’ [“Werk”] is destined are ‘encountered too’.(2)
If this is ready-to-hand, then there lies in the kind of Being which belongs
to  it  (that  is,  in  its  involvement)  an  essential  assignment  or  reference  to
possible  wearers,  for  instance,  for  whom  it  should  be  ‘cut  to  the  figure’.
Similarly,  when  material  is  put  to  use,  we  encounter  its  producer  or
‘supplier’ as one who ‘serves’ well or badly.
 

1.  ‘…die  Ständigkeit  des  Selbst  ebensosehr  wie  seine  mögliche  “Unselbständigkeit”...’  The
adjective  ‘ständig’,  which  we  have  usually  translated  as  ‘constant’  in  the  sense  of  ‘permanent’  or
‘continuing’,  goes  back  to  the  root  meaning  of  ‘standing’,  as  do  the  adjectives  ‘selbständig’
(‘independent’)  and  ‘unselbständig’  (‘dependent’).  These  concepts  will  be  discussed  more  fully  in
Section  64  below,  especially  H.  322,  where  ‘Unselbständigkeit’  will  be  rewritten  not  as  ‘Un-
selbständkeit’  (‘failure  to  stand  by  one’s  Self’)  but  as  ‘Unselbst-ständigkeit’  (‘constancy  to  the
Unself’). See also H. 128. (The connection with the concept of existence will perhaps be clearer if
one recalls that the Latin verb ‘existere’ may also be derived from a verb of standing, as Heidegger
points out in his later writings.)

2. Cf. Section 15 above, especially H. 70f.

H. 118

 

When, for example, we walk along the edge of a field but ‘outside it’,
the field shows itself as belonging to such-and-such a person, and decently
kept up by him; the book we have used was bought at So-and-so’s shop and
given  by  such-and-such  a  person,  and  so  forth.  The  boat  anchored  at  the
shore  is  assigned  in  its  Being-in-itself  to  an  acquaintance  who  undertakes
voyages  with  it;  but  even  if  it  is  a  ‘boat  which  is  strange  to  us’,  it  still  is
indicative of Others. The Others who are thus ‘encountered’ in a ready-to-
hand,  environmental  context  of  equipment,  are  not  somehow  added  on  in
thought  to  some  Thing  which  is  proximally  just  present-at-hand;  such
‘Things’ are encountered from out of the world in which they are ready-to-
hand  for  Others—a  world  which  is  always  mine  too  in  advance.  In  our
previous  analysis,  the  range  of  what  is  encountered  within-the-world  was,
in the first instance, narrowed down to equipment ready-to-hand or Nature
present-at-hand,  and  thus  to  entities  with  a  character  other  than  that  of
Dasein.  This  restriction  was  necessary  not  only  for  the  purpose  of
simplifying our explication but above all because the kind of Being which
belongs to the Dasein of Others, as we encounter it within-the-world, differs
from  readiness-to-hand  and  presence-at-hand.  Thus  Dasein’s  world  frees
entities  which  not  only  are  quite  distinct  from  equipment  and  Things,  but
which also—in accordance with their kind of Being as Dasein themselves
—are ‘in’ the world in which they are at the same time encountered within-
the-world,  and  are  ‘in’  it  by  way  of  Being-in-the-world.(1)  These  entities
are neither present-at-hand nor ready-to-hand; on the contrary, they are like
the very Dasein which frees them, in that they are there too, and there with
it.  So  if  one  should  want  to  identify  the  world  in  general  with  entities
within-the-world, one would have to say that Dasein too is ‘world’.(2)
 

1. ‘…sondern gemäss seiner Seinsart als Dasein selbst  in  der  Weise  des  In-der-Welt-seins  “in”

der Welt ist, in der es zugleich innerweltlich begegnet.’

2.  ‘Dieses  Seiende  ist  weder  vorhanden  noch  zuhanden,  sondern  ist  so,  wie  das  freigebende
Dasein selbst—es ist auch und mit da. Wollte man denn schon Welt überhaupt mit dem innerweltlich
Seienden identifizieren, dann müsste man sagen, “Welt” ist auch Dasein.’

Thus  in  characterizing  the  encountering  of  Others,  one  is  again  still
oriented  by that Dasein which is  in  each case  one’s own.  But  even  in  this
characterization  does  one  not  start  by  marking  out  and  isolating  the  ‘I’  so

that one must then  seek some way  of getting  over to  the  Others  from this
isolated  subject?  To  avoid  this  misunderstanding  we  must  notice  in  what
sense  we  are  talking  about  ‘the  Others’.  By  ‘Others’  we  do  not  mean
everyone  else  but  me—those  over  against  whom  the  “I”  stands  out.  They
are  rather  those  from  whom,  for  the  most  part,  one  does  not  distinguish
oneself—those  among  whom  one  is  too.  This  Being-there-too  [Auch-da-
sein] with them does not have the ontological character of a Being-present-
at-hand-along-‘with’ them within a world. This  ‘with’  is  something of the
the  ‘too’  means  a  sameness  of  Being  as
character  of  Dasein; 
circumspectively concernful Being-in-the-world. ‘With’ and ‘too’ are to be
understood  existentially,  not  categorially.  By  reason  of  this  with-like
[mithaften]  Being-in-the-world,  the  world  is  always  the  one  that  I  share
with  Others.  The  world  of  Dasein  is  a  with-world  [Mitwelt].  Being-in  is
Being-with Others.  Their  Being-in-themselves  within-the-world  is  Dasein-
with [Mit-dasein].

H. 119

 

When Others are encountered, it is not the case that one’s own subject is
proximally  present-at-hand  and  that  the  rest  of  the  subjects,  which  are
likewise  occurrents,  get  discriminated  beforehand  and  then  apprehended;
nor  are  they  encountered  by  a  primary  act  of  looking  at  oneself  in  such  a
way  that  the  opposite  pole  of  a  distinction  first  gets  ascertained.  They  are
encountered  from  out  of  the  world,  in  which  concernfully  circumspective
Dasein  essentially  dwells.  Theoretically  concocted  ‘explanations’  of  the
Being-present-at-hand of Others urge themselves upon us all too easily; but
over against such explanations we must hold fast to the phenomenal facts of
the  case  which  we  have  pointed  out,  namely,  that  Others  are  encountered
environmentally.  This  elemental  worldly  kind  of  encountering,  which
belongs  to  Dasein  and  is  closest  to  it,  goes  so  far  that  even  one’s  own
Dasein becomes something that it can itself proximally ‘come across’ only
when  it  looks away  from  ‘Experiences’  and  the  ‘centre  of  its  actions’,  or
does not as yet ‘see’ them at all. Dasein finds ‘itself’ proximally in what it
does, uses, expects, avoids—in those things environmentally ready-to-hand
with which it is proximally concerned.

And  even  when  Dasein  explicitly  addresses  itself  as  “I  here”,  this
locative  personal  designation  must  be  understood  in  terms  of  Dasein’s

existential spatiality. In Interpreting this (See Section 23) we  have already
intimated that this “I-here” does not mean a certain privileged point—that
of an I-Thing—but is to be understood as Being-in in terms of the “yonder”
of  the  world  that  is  ready-to-hand—the  “yonder”  which  is  the  dwelling-
place of Dasein as concern.(1)
 

1. ‘…dass dieses Ich-hier nicht einen ausgezeichneten Punkt des Ichdinges meint, sondern sich
versteht als In-sein aus dem Dort der zuhandenen Welt, bei dem Dasein als Besorgen sich aufhält.’
The older editions have ‘In-Sein’ for ‘In-sein’, and ‘dabei’ for ‘bei dem’.

W. von Humboldt(ii) has alluded to certain languages which express the
‘I’ by ‘here’, the ‘thou’ by ‘there’, the ‘he’ by ‘yonder’, thus rendering the
personal  pronouns  by  locative  adverbs,  to  put  it  grammatically.  It  is
controversial  whether  indeed  the  primordial  signification  of  locative
expressions is adverbial or pronominal. But this dispute loses its basis if one
notes  that  locative  adverbs  have  a  relationship  to  the  “I”  qua  Dasein. The
‘here’  and  the  ‘there’  and  the  ‘yonder’  are  primarily  not  mere  ways  of
designating  the  location  of  entities  present-at-hand  within-the-world  at
positions  in  space;  they  are  rather  characteristics  of  Dasein’s  primordial
spatiality. These supposedly locative adverbs are Dasein-designations; 
they have a signification which is primarily existential, not categorial. But
they are not pronouns either; their signification is prior to the differentiation
of  locative  adverbs  and  personal  pronouns:  these  expressions  have  a
Dasein-signification  which  is  authentically  spatial,  and  which  serves  as
evidence that when we interpret Dasein without any theoretical distortions
we  can  see  it  immediately  as  ‘Being-alongside’  the  world  with  which  it
concerns  itself,  and  as  Being-alongside  it  spatially—that  is  to  say,  as
desevering*  and  giving  directionality.  In  the  ‘here’,  the  Dasein  which  is
absorbed in its world speaks not towards itself but away from itself towards
the  ‘yonder’  of  something  circumspectively  ready-to-hand;  yet  it  still  has
itself in view in its existential spatiality.
 

ii. ‘Über die Verwandtschaft der Ortsadverbien mit dem Pronomen in einigen Sprachen’ (1829),
Gesammelte Schriften (published by the Prussian Academy of Sciences), vol. VI, Part I, pp. 304—
330.

H. 120

 

Dasein understands itself proximally and for the most part in terms of its
world; and the Dasein-with of Others is often encountered in terms of what
is  ready-to-hand  within-the-world.  But  even  if  Others  become  themes  for
study, as it were, in their own Dasein, they are not encountered as person-
Things present-at-hand: we meet them ‘at work’, that is, primarily in their
Being-in-the-world. Even if we see the Other ‘just standing around’, he is
never  apprehended  as  a  human-Thing  present-at-hand,  but  his  ‘standing-
around’ 
unconcerned,
uncircumspective tarrying alongside everything and nothing [Verweilen bei
Allem  und  Keinem].  The  Other  is  encountered  in  his  Dasein-with  in  the
world.

existential  mode 

of  Being—an 

an 

is 

H. 121

 

The  expression  ‘Dasein’,  however,  shows  plainly  that  ‘in  the  first
instance’ this entity is unrelated to Others, and that of course it can still be
‘with’  Others  afterwards.  Yet  one  must  not  fail  to  notice  that  we  use  the
term “Dasein-with” to designate that Being for which the Others who  a r e
 [die seienden Anderen] are freed within-the-world. This Dasein-with of the
Others is disclosed within-the-world for a Dasein, and so too for those who
are  Daseins  with  us  [die  Mitdaseienden],  only  because  Dasein  in  itself  is
essentially  Being-with.  The  phenomenological  assertion  that  “Dasein  is
essentially Being-with” has an existential-ontological meaning. It does not
seek to establish ontically that factically I am not present-at-hand alone, and
that Others of my kind occur. If this were what is meant by the proposition
that  Dasein’s  Being-in-the-world  is  essentially  constituted  by  Being-with,
then  Being-with  would  not  be  an  existential  attribute  which  Dasein,  of  its
own accord, has coming to it from its own kind of Being. It would rather be
something  which  turns  up  in  every  case  by  reason  of  the  occurrence  of
Others.  Being-with  is  an  existential  characteristic  of  Dasein  even  when
factically  no  Other  is  present-at-hand  or  perceived.  Even  Dasein’s  Being-
alone  is  Being-with  in  the  world.  The  Other  can  be  missing  only  in  and
for(1) a Being-with. Being-alone is a deficient mode of Being-with; its very
possibility is the proof of this. On the other hand, factical Being-alone is not
obviated by the occurrence of a second example of a human being ‘beside’
me,  or by ten  such examples. Even if  these and more  are  present-at-hand,
Dasein can still be alone. So Being-with and the facticity of Being with one

another are not based on the occurrence together of several ‘subjects’. Yet
Being-alone  ‘among’  many  does  not  mean  that  with  regard  to  their  Being
they  are  merely  present-at-hand  there  alongside  us.  Even  in  our  Being
‘among them’ they are there with us; their Dasein-with is encountered in a
mode  in  which  they  are  indifferent  and  alien.  Being  missing  and  ‘Being
away’  [Das  Fehlen  und  “Fortsein”]  are  modes  of  Dasein-with,  and  are
possible  only  because  Dasein  as  Being-with  lets  the  Dasein  of  Others  be
encountered  in  its  world.  Being-with  is  in  every  case  a  characteristic  of
one’s  own  Dasein;  Dasein-with  characterizes  the  Dasein  of  Others  to  the
extent that it is freed by its world for a Being-with. Only so far as one’s own
Dasein  has  the  essential  structure  of  Being-with,  is  it  Dasein-with  as
encounterable for Others.(2)

If Dasein-with remains existentially constitutive for Being-in-the-world,
then,  like  our  circumspective  dealings  with  the  ready-to-hand  within-the-
world (which, by way of anticipation, we have called ‘concern’), it must be
Interpreted in terms of the phenomenon of care; for as “care” the Being of
Dasein in general is to be defined(3). (Compare Chapter 6 of this Division.)
Concern is a character-of-Being which Being-with cannot have as its own,
even  though  Being-with,  like  concern,  is  a  Being  towards  entities
encountered  within-the-world.  But  those  entities  towards  which  Dasein  as
Being-with comports itself do not have the kind of Being which belongs to
equipment  ready-to-hand;  they  are  themselves  Dasein.  These  entities  are
not objects of concern, but rather of solicitude.(4)
 

1. Italics supplied in the later editions.
2. ‘…Mitdasein charakterisiert das Dasein anderer, sofern es für ein Mitsein durch dessen Welt
freigegeben ist. Das eigene Dasein ist, sofern es die Wesensstruktur des Mitseins hat, als für Andere
begegnend Mitdasein.’

3. ‘…als welche das Sein des Daseins überhaupt bestimmt wird.’ The older editions omit ‘wird’.
4. ‘Dieses Seiende wird nicht besorgt, sondern steht in der Fürsorge.’ There is no good English
equivalent for ‘Fürsorge’, which we shall usually translate by ‘solicitude’. The more literal ‘caring-
for’  has  the  connotation  of  ‘being  fond  of’,  which  we  do  not  want  here;  ‘personal  care’  suggests
personal hygiene; ‘personal concern’ suggests one’s personal business or affairs. ‘Fürsorge’ is rather
the kind of care which we find in ‘prenatal care’ or ‘taking care of the children’, or even the kind of
care  which  is  administered  by  welfare  agencies.  Indeed  the  word  ‘Fürsorge’  is  regularly  used  in
contexts  where  we  would  speak  of  ‘welfare  work’  or  ‘social  welfare’;  this  is  the  usage  which
Heidegger  has  in  mind  in  his  discussion  of  ‘Fürsorge’  as  ‘a  factical  social  arrangement’.  (The
etymological  connection  between  ‘Sorge  (‘care’),  ‘Fürsorge’  (‘solicitude’),  and  ‘Besorgen
(‘concern’), is entirely lost in our translation.)

Even ‘concern’ with food and clothing, and the nursing of the sick body,
are forms of solicitude. But we understand the expression “solicitude” in a
way  which  corresponds  to  our  use  of  “concern”  as  a  term  for  an
existentiale. For example, ‘welfare work’ [“Fürsorge”], as a factical social
arrangement,  is  grounded  in  Dasein’s  state  of  Being  as  Being-with.  Its
factical  urgency  gets  its  motivation  in  that  Dasein  maintains  itself
proximally and for the most part in the deficient modes of solicitude. Being
for, against, or without one another, passing one another by, not “mattering”
to  one  another—these  are  possible  ways  of  solicitude.  And  it  is  precisely
these last-named deficient and Indifferent modes that characterize everyday,
average  Being-with-one-another.  These  modes  of  Being  show  again  the
characteristics of inconspicuousness and obviousness which belong just as
much  to  the  everyday  Dasein-with  of  Others  within-the-world  as  to  the
readiness-to-hand  of  the  equipment  with  which  one  is  daily  concerned.
These  Indifferent  modes  of  Being-with-one-another  may  easily  mislead
ontological  Interpretation  into  interpreting  this  kind  of  Being,  in  the  first
instance, as the mere Being-present-at-hand of several subjects. It seems as
if  only  negligible  variations  of  the  same  kind  of  Being  lie  before  us;  yet
ontologically there is an essential distinction between the ‘indifferent’ way
in  which  Things  at  random  occur  together  and  the  way  in  which  entities
who are with one another do not “matter” to one another.

H. 122

 

With  regard  to  its  positive  modes,  solicitude  has  two  extreme
possibilities.  It  can,  as  it  were,  take  away  ‘care’  from  the  Other  and  put
itself  in  his  position  in  concern:  it  can  leap  in  for  him.(1)  This  kind  of
solicitude takes over for the Other that with which he is to concern himself.
The  Other  is  thus  thrown  out  of  his  own  position;  he  steps  back  so  that
afterwards, when the matter has been attended to, he can either take it over
as  something  finished  and  at  his  disposal,(2)  or  disburden  himself  of  it
completely. In such solicitude the Other can become one who is dominated
and  dependent,  even  if  this  domination  is  a  tacit  one  and  remains  hidden
from him. This kind of solicitude, which leaps in and takes away ‘care’, is
to a large extent determinative for Being with one another, and pertains for
the most part to our concern with the ready-to-hand.
 

1.  ‘…sich  an  seine  Stelle  setzen,  für  ihn  einspringen.’  Here,  as  on  H.  100  (See  our  note  2),  it
would be more idiomatic to translate ‘für ihn einspringen’ as ‘intervene for him’, ‘stand in for him’
or  ‘serve  as  deputy  for  him’;  but  since  ‘einspringen’  is  to  be  contrasted  with  ‘vorspringen’,
‘vorausspringen’  and  perhaps  even  ‘entspringen’  in  the  following  paragraphs,  we  have  chosen  a
translation which suggests the etymological connection.

2. ‘…um nachträglich das Besorgte als fertig Verfügbares zu übernehmen...’

In  contrast  to  this,  there  is  also  the  possibility  of  a  kind  of  solicitude
which  does  not  so  much  leap  in  for  the  Other  as  leap  ahead  of  him  [ihm
vorausspringt] in his existentiell potentiality-for-Being, not in order to take
away his ‘care’ but rather to give it back to him authentically as such for the
first time. This kind of solicitude pertains essentially to authentic care—that
is, to the existence of the Other, not to a “what” with which he is concerned;
it  helps  the  Other  to  become  transparent  to  himself  in  his  care  and  to
become free for it.

Solicitude  proves  to  be  a  state  of  Dasein’s  Being—one  which,  in
accordance  with  its  different  possibilities,  is  bound  up  with  its  Being
towards  the  world  of  its  concern,  and  likewise  with  its  authentic  Being
towards  itself.  Being  with  one  another  is  based  proximally  and  often
exclusively  upon  what  is  a  matter  of  common  concern  in  such  Being.  A
Being-with-one-another  which  arises  [entspringt]  from  one’s  doing  the
same  thing  as  someone  else,  not  only  keeps  for  the  most  part  within  the
outer limits, but enters the mode of distance and reserve. The Being-with-
one-another of those who are hired for the same affair often thrives only on
mistrust. On the other hand, when they devote themselves to the same affair
in  common,  their  doing  so  is  determined  by  the  manner  in  which  their
Dasein, each in its own way, has been taken hold of.(1) They thus become
authentically  bound  together,  and  this  makes  possible  the  right  kind  of
objectivity  [die  rechte  Sachlichkeit],  which  frees  the  Other  in  his  freedom
for himself.

Everyday  Being-with-one-another  maintains  itself  between  the  two
extremes of positive solicitude—that which leaps in and dominates, and that
which  leaps  forth  and  liberates  [vorspringend-befreienden].  It  brings
numerous mixed forms to maturity;(2) to describe these and classify them
would take us beyond the limits of this investigation.

H. 123

 

Just as circumspection belongs to concern as a way of discovering what
is ready-to-hand, solicitude is guided by considerateness  and forbearance.
(3)  Like  solicitude,  these  can  range  through  their  respective  deficient  and
the
the  point  of 
to 
Indifferent  modes  up 
perfunctoriness for which indifference leads the way.(4)
 

inconsiderateness  or 

1.  ‘Umgekehrt  ist  das  gemeinsame  Sicheinsetzen  für  dieselbe  Sache  aus  dem  je  eigens

ergriffenen Dasein bestimmt.’

2. Reading ‘...und zeitigt mannigfache Mischformen...’ with the older editions. The later editions
have ‘zeigt’ (‘shows’) instead of ‘zeitigt’ (‘brings to maturity’). On ‘zeitigen’ see H. 304 and our note
ad loc.

3. ‘Wie dem Besorgen als Weise des Entdeckens des Zuhandenen die Umsicht zugehört, so ist die
Fürsorge  geleitet  durch  die  Rücksicht  und  Nachsicht.’  Heidegger  is  here  calling  attention  to  the
etymological kinship of the three words which he italicizes, each of which stands for a special kind of
sight or seeing (‘Sicht’).

The italicization of ‘Umsicht’ (‘circumspection’) is introduced in the newer editions.
4.  ‘…bis  zur  Rücksichtslosigkeit  und  dem  Nachsehen,  das  die  Gleichgültigkeit  leitet.’  This
passage  is  ambiguous  both  syntactically  and  semantically.  It  is  not  clear,  for  instance,  whether  the
subject  of  the  relative  clause  is  ‘die  Gleichgültigkeit’  or  the  pronoun  ‘das’,  though  we  prefer  the
former interpretation. ‘Nachsehen’, which is etymologically akin to ‘Nachsicht’, means to ‘inspect’
or ‘check’ something; but it often means to do this in a very perfunctory manner, and this latter sense
may well be the one which Heidegger has in mind.

The  world  not  only  frees  the  ready-to-hand  as  entities  encountered
within-the-world; it also frees Dasein—the Others in their Dasein-with. But
Dasein’s ownmost meaning of Being is such that this entity (which has been
freed  environmentally)  is  Being-in  in  the  same  world  in  which,  as
encounterable  for  Others,  it  is  there  with  them.  We  have  interpreted
worldhood as that referential totality which constitutes significance (Section
18). In Being-familiar with  this significance  and previously  understanding
it,  Dasein  lets  what  is  ready-to-hand  be  encountered  as  discovered  in  its
involvement.  In  Dasein’s  Being,  the  context  of  references  or  assignments
which  significance  implies  is  tied  up  with  Dasein’s  ownmost  Being—a
Being which essentially can have no involvement, but which is rather that
Being for the sake of which Dasein itself is as it is.

According  to  the  analysis  which  we  have  now  completed,  Being  with
Others belongs to the Being of Dasein, which is an issue for Dasein in its
very  Being.(1)  Thus  as  Being-with,  Dasein  ‘is’  essentially  for  the  sake  of
Others.  This  must  be  understood  as  an  existential  statement  as  to  its
essence. Even if the particular factical Dasein does not turn to Others, and
supposes that it has no need of them or manages to get along without them,

it  is  in  the  way  of  Being-with.  In  Being-with,  as  the  existential  “for-the-
sake-of” of Others, these have already been disclosed in their Dasein. With
their  Being-with,  their  disclosedness  has  been  constituted  beforehand;
accordingly, this disclosedness also goes to make up significance—that is to
say,  worldhood.  And,  significance,  as  worldhood,  is  tied  up  with  the
existential “for-the-sake-of-which”.(2) Since the worldhood of that world in
which every Dasein essentially is already, is thus constituted, it accordingly
lets us encounter what is environmentally ready-to-hand as something with
which we are circumspectively concerned, and it does so in such a way that
together  with  it  we  encounter  the  Dasein-with  of  Others.  The  structure  of
the  world’s  worldhood  is  such  that  Others  are  not  proximally  present-at-
hand as free-floating subjects along with other Things, but show themselves
in  the  world  in  their  special  environmental  Being,  and  do  so  in  terms  of
what is ready-to-hand in that world.
 

1. ‘…zum Sein des Daseins, um das es ihm in seinem Sein selbst geht…’ The older editions have

‘darum’ instead of ‘um das’.

2. ‘Diese mit dem Mitsein vorgängig konstituierte Erschlossenheit der Anderen macht demnach
auch die Bedeutsamkeit, d.h. die Weltlichkeit mit aus, als welche sie im existenzialen Worum-willen
festgemacht ist.’ The word ‘sie’ appears only in the later editions.

H. 124

 

Being-with  is  such  that  the  disclosedness  of  the  Dasein-with  of  Others
belongs  to  it;  this  means  that  because  Dasein’s  Being  is  Being-with,  its
understanding  of  Being  already  implies  the  understanding  of  Others.  This
understanding, like any understanding, is not an acquaintance derived from
knowledge about them, but a primordially existential kind of Being, which,
more than anything else, makes such knowledge and acquaintance possible.
(1)  Knowing  oneself  [Sichkennen]  is  grounded  in  Being-with,  which
understands  primordially.  It  operates  proximally  in  accordance  with  the
kind  of  Being  which  is  closest  to  us—Being-in-the-world  as  Being-with;
and  it  does  so  by  an  acquaintance  with  that  which  Dasein,  along  with  the
Others,  comes  across  in  its  environmental  circumspection  and  concerns
itself  with—an  acquaintance  in  which  Dasein  understands.  Solicitous
concern  is  understood  in  terms  of  what  we  are  concerned  with,  and  along
with  our  understanding  of  it.  Thus  in  concernful  solicitude  the  Other  is
proximally disclosed.

But  because  solicitude  dwells  proximally  and  for  the  most  part  in  the
deficient or at least the Indifferent modes (in the indifference of passing one
another  by),  the  kind  of  knowing-oneself  which  is  essential  and  closest,
demands  that  one  become  acquainted  with  oneself.(2)  And  when,  indeed,
one’s  knowing-oneself  gets  lost  in  such  ways  as  aloofness,  hiding  oneself
away, or putting on a disguise, Being-with-one-another must follow special
routes of its own in order to come close to Others, or even to ‘see through
them’ [“hinter sie” zu kommen].
 

1. ‘Dieses Verstehen ist, wie Verstehen überhaupt, nicht eine aus Erkennen erwachsene Kenntnis,
sondern eine ursprünglich existenziale Seinsart die Erkennen und Kenntnis allererst möglich macht’.
While  we  have  here  translated  ‘Kenntnis’  as  ‘acquaintance’  and  ‘Erkennen’  as  ‘knowledge  about’,
these terms must not be understood in the special senses exploited by Lord Russell and C. L. Lewis.
The  ‘acquaintance’  here  involved  is  of  the  kind  which  may  be  acquired  whenever  one  is  well
informed about something, whether one has any direct contact with it or not.

2.  ‘…bedarf  das  nächste  und  wesenhafte  Sichkennen  eines  Sichkennenlernens.’  ‘Sichkennen’
(‘knowing oneself’) is to be distinguished sharply from ‘Selbsterkenntnis’ (‘knowledge of the Self’),
which will be discussed on H. 146. See our note 1.

But just as opening oneself up [Sichoffenbaren] or closing oneself off is
grounded in one’s having Being-with-one-another as one’s kind of Being at
the time, and indeed is nothing else but this, even the explicit disclosure of
the Other in solicitude grows only out of one’s primarily Being with him in
each case. Such a disclosure of the Other (which is indeed thematic, but not
in  the  manner  of  theoretical  psychology)  easily  becomes  the  phenomenon
which  proximally  comes  to  view  when  one  considers  the  theoretical
problematic  of  understanding  the  ‘psychical  life  of  Others’  [“fremden
Seelenlebens”]. In this phenomenally ‘proximal’ manner it thus presents a
way of Being with one another understandingly; but at the same time it gets
taken as that which, primordially and ‘in the beginning’, constitutes Being
towards  Others  and  makes  it  possible  at  all.  This  phenomenon,  which  is
none too happily designated as ‘empathy’ [“Einfühlung”], is then supposed,
as  it  were,  to  provide  the  first  ontological  bridge  from  one’s  own  subject,
which  is  given  proximally  as  alone,  to  the  other  subject,  which  is
proximally quite closed off.

Of  course  Being  towards  Others  is  ontologically  different  from  Being
towards Things which are present-at-hand. The entity which is ‘other’ has
itself the same kind of Being as Dasein. In Being with and towards Others,
there  is  thus  a  relationship  of  Being  [Seinsverhältnis]  from  Dasein  to

Dasein. But it might be said that this relationship is already constitutive for
one’s own Dasein, which, in its own right, has an understanding of Being,
and which thus  relates itself(1)  towards  Dasein. The  relationship-of-Being
which one has towards Others would then become a Projection(2) of one’s
own  Being-towards-oneself  ‘into  something  else’.  The  Other  would  be  a
duplicate of the Self.

H. 125

 

But while these deliberations seem obvious enough, it is easy to see that
they have little ground to stand on. The presupposition which this argument
demands—that Dasein’s Being towards itself is Being towards an Other—
fails to hold. As long as the legitimacy of this presupposition has not turned
out to be evident, one may still be puzzled as to how Dasein’s relationship
to itself is thus to be disclosed to the Other as Other.

is  Being 

Not  only 

towards  Others  an  autonomous, 

irreducible
relationship  of  Being:  this  relationship,  as  Being-with,  is  one  which,  with
Dasein’s  Being,  already  is.(3)  Of  course  it  is  indisputable  that  a  lively
mutual  acquaintanceship  on  the  basis  of  Being-with,  often  depends  upon
how far one’s own Dasein has understood itself at the time; but this means
that  it  depends  only  upon  how  far  one’s  essential  Being  with  Others  has
made itself transparent and has not disguised itself.(4) And that is possible
only  if  Dasein,  as  Being-in-the-world,  already  is  with  Others.  ‘Empathy’
does  not  first  constitute  Being-with;  only  on  the  basis  of  Being-with  does
‘empathy’ become possible: it gets its motivation from the unsociability of
the dominant modes of Being-with.(5)
 

1.  ‘…sich...  verhält...’  We  have  often  translated  this  expression  as  ‘comports  itself’,
compromising  between  two  other  possible  meanings:  ‘relates  itself’  and  ‘behaves’  or  ‘conducts
itself’. In this passage, however, and in many others where this expression is tied up with ‘Verhältnis’
(‘relationship’)  rather  than  with  ‘Verhalten’  (‘behaviour’  or  ‘conduct’),  only  ‘relates  itself’  seems
appropriate.

2. ‘Projektion’. Here we are dealing with ‘projection’ in the familiar psychological sense, not in

the sense which would be expressed by ‘Entwurf’. See H. 145 ff.

3.  ‘Das  Sein  zu  Anderen  ist  nicht  nur  ein  eigenständiger,  irreduktibler  Seinsbezug,  er  ist  als

Mitsein mit dem Sein des Daseins schon seiend.’

4.  ‘…wie  weit  es  das  wesenhafte  Mitsein  mit  anderen  sich  durchsichtig  gemacht  und  nicht

verstellt hat...’ (The older editions have ‘...sich nicht undurchsichtig gemacht und verstellt hat…’)

5. ‘ “Einfühlung” konstituiert nicht erst das Mitsein, sondern ist auf dessen Grunde erst möglich
und durch die vorherrschenden defizienten Modi des Mitseins in ihrer Unumgänglichkeit motiviert.’

But the fact that ‘empathy’ is not a primordial existential phenomenon,
any  more  than  is  knowing  in  general,  does  not  mean  that  there  is  nothing
problematical  about  it.  The  special  hermeneutic  of  empathy  will  have  to
show  how  Being-with-one-another  and  Dasein’s  knowing  of  itself  are  led
astray  and  obstructed  by  the  various  possibilities  of  Being  which  Dasein
itself  possesses,  so  that  a  genuine  ‘understanding’  gets  suppressed,  and
Dasein  takes  refuge  in  substitutes;  the  possibility  of  understanding  the
stranger correctly presupposes such a hermeneutic as its positive existential
condition.(1)  Our  analysis  has  shown  that  Being-with  is  an  existential
constituent  of  Being-in-the-world.  Dasein-with  has  proved  to  be  a  kind  of
Being  which  entities  encountered  within-the-world  have  as  their  own.  So
far  as Dasein is at  all,  it  has  Being-with-one-another  as  its  kind  of  Being.
This cannot be conceived as a summative result of the occurrence of several
‘subjects’.  Even  to  come  across  a  number  of  ‘subjects’  [einer  Anzahl  von
“Subjekten”]  becomes  possible  only  if  the  Others  who  are  concerned
proximally 
treated  merely  as  ‘numerals’
[“Nummer”].  Such  a  number  of  ‘subjects’  gets  discovered  only  by  a
definite  Being-with-and-towards-one-another.  This  ‘inconsiderate’  Being-
with  ‘reckons’  [“rechnet”]  with  the  Others  without  seriously  ‘counting  on
them’  [“auf  sie  zählt”],  or  without  even  wanting  to  ‘have  anything  to  do’
with them.

their  Dasein-with  are 

in 

One’s  own  Dasein,  like  the  Dasein-with  of  Others,  is  encountered
proximally and for the most part in terms of the with-world with which we
are environmentally concerned. When Dasein is absorbed in the world of its
concern—that is, at the same time, in its Being-with towards Others—it is
not  itself.  Who  is  it,  then,  who  has  taken  over  Being  as  everyday  Being-
with-one-another?
 

1.  ‘…welche  positive  existenziale  Bedingung  rechtes  Fremdverstehen  für  seine  Möglichkeit
voraussetzt.’  We  have  construed  ‘welche’  as  referring  back  to  ‘Hermeneutik’,  though  this  is  not
entirely clear.

27. Everyday Being-one’s-Self and the “They”

 

 

H. 126

The  ontologically  relevant  result  of  our  analysis  of  Being-with  is  the
insight that the ‘subject character’ of one’s own Dasein and that of Others is
to  be defined existentially—that  is,  in  terms  of certain  ways  in  which one
may  be.  In  that  with  which  we  concern  ourselves  environmentally  the
Others  are  encountered  as  what  they  are;  they  are what  they  do  [sie  sind
das, was sie betreiben].

In one’s concern with what one has taken hold of, whether with, for, or
against,  the  Others,  there  is  constant  care  as  to  the  way  one  differs  from
them,  whether  that  difference  is  merely  one  that  is  to  be  evened  out,
whether one’s own Dasein has lagged behind the Others and wants to catch
up  in  relationship  to  them,  or  whether  one’s  Dasein  already  has  some
priority over them and sets out to keep them suppressed. The care about this
distance between them is disturbing to Being-with-one-another, though this
disturbance  is  one  that  is  hidden  from  it.  If  we  may  express  this
existentially, such Being-with-one-another has the character of distantiality
[Abständigkeit]. The more inconspicuous this kind of Being is to everyday
Dasein  itself,  all  the  more  stubbornly  and  primordially  does  it  work  itself
out.

But this distantiality which belongs to Being-with, is such that Dasein, as
everyday  Being-with-one-another,  stands  in  subjection  [Botmässigkeit]  to
Others.  It  itself  is  not;(1)  its  Being  has  been  taken  away  by  the  Others.
Dasein’s everyday possibilities of Being are for the Others to dispose of as
they  please.  These  Others,  moreover,  are  not  definite  Others.  On  the
contrary,    a  n  y    Other  can  represent  them.  What  is  decisive  is  just  that
inconspicuous  domination  by  Others  which  has  already  been  taken  over
unawares  from  Dasein  as  Being-with.  One  belongs  to  the  Others  oneself
and enhances their power. ‘The Others’ whom one thus designates in order
to cover up the fact of one’s belonging to them essentially oneself, are those
who proximally and for the most part ‘are there’ in  everyday  Being-with-
one-another.  The  “who”  is  not  this  one,  not  that  one,  not  oneself  [man
selbst], not some people [einige], and not the sum of them all. The ‘who’ is
the neuter, the “they” [das Man].
 

1. ‘Nicht es selbst ist;…’

H. 127

 

We have shown earlier how in the environment which lies closest to us,
the  public  ‘environment’  already  is  ready-to-hand  and  is  also  a  matter  of
concern [mitbesorgt]. In utilizing public means of transport and in making
use of information services such as the newspaper, every Other is like the
next.  This  Being-with-one-another dissolves  one’s own Dasein completely
into  the  kind  of  Being  of  ‘the  Others’,  in  such  a  way,  indeed,  that  the
Others,  as  distinguishable  and  explicit,  vanish  more  and  more.  In  this
inconspicuousness and unascertainability, the real dictatorship of the “they”
is  unfolded.  We  take  pleasure  and  enjoy  ourselves  as  they  [man]  take
pleasure;  we  read,  see,  and  judge  about  literature  and  art  as  they  see  and
judge; likewise we shrink back from the ‘great mass’ as they shrink  back;
we find ‘shocking’ what they find  shocking.  The “they”, which is  nothing
definite,  and  which  all  are,  though  not  as  the  sum,  prescribes  the  kind  of
Being of everydayness.

The  “they”  has  its  own  ways  in  which  to  be.  That  tendency  of  Being-
with which we have called “distantiality” is grounded in the fact that Being-
with-one-another  concerns  itself  as  such  with  averageness,  which  is  an
existential characteristic of the “they”. The “they”, in its Being, essentially
makes  an  issue  of  this.  Thus  the  “they”  maintains  itself  factically  in  the
averageness of that which belongs to it, of that which it regards as valid and
that  which  it  does  not,  and  of  that  to  which  it  grants  success  and  that  to
which it denies it. In this averageness with which it prescribes what can and
may  be  ventured,  it  keeps  watch  over  everything  exceptional  that  thrusts
itself  to  the  fore.  Every  kind  of  priority  gets  noiselessly  suppressed.
Overnight, everything that is primordial gets glossed over as something that
has  long  been  well  known.  Everything  gained  by  a  struggle  becomes  just
something  to  be  manipulated.  Every  secret  loses  its  force.  This  care  of
averageness reveals in turn an essential tendency of Dasein which we call
the “levelling down” [Einebnung] of all possibilities of Being.

Distantiality, averageness, and levelling down, as ways of Being for the
“they”,  constitute  what  we  know  as  ‘publicness’  [“die  Offentlichkeit”].
Publicness  proximally  controls  every  way  in  which  the  world  and  Dasein
get interpreted, and it is always right—not because there is some distinctive
and  primary  relationship-of-Being  in  which  it  is  related  to  ‘Things’,  or
because it avails itself of some transparency on the part of Dasein which it
has explicitly appropriated, but because it is insensitive to every difference
of level and of genuineness and thus never gets to the ‘heart of the matter’

[“auf die Sachen”]. By publicness everything gets obscured, and what has
thus been covered up gets passed off as something familiar and accessible
to everyone.

The “they” is there alongside everywhere [ist überall dabei], but in such
a  manner  that  it  has  always  stolen  away  whenever  Dasein  presses  for  a
decision. Yet because the “they” presents every judgment and decision as its
own, it deprives the particular Dasein of its answerability. The “they” can,
as  it  were,  manage  to  have  ‘them’  constantly  invoking  it.(1)  It  can  be
answerable for everything most easily, because it is not someone who needs
to vouch for anything. It ‘was’ always the “they” who did it, and yet it can
be  said  that  it  has  been  ‘no  one’.  In  Dasein’s  everydayness  the  agency
through which most things come about is one of which we must say that “it
was no one”.
 

1. ‘Das Man kann es sich gleichsam leisten, dass “man” sich ständig auf es beruft.’

H. 128

 

Thus  the  particular  Dasein  in  its  everydayness  is  disburdened  by  the
“they”.  Not  only  that;  by  thus  disburdening  it  of  its  Being,  the  “they”
accommodates  Dasein  [kommt...  dem  Dasein  entgegen]  if  Dasein  has  any
tendency to take things easily and make them easy. And because the “they”
constantly  accommodates  the  particular  Dasein  by  disburdening  it  of  its
Being, the “they” retains and enhances its stubborn dominion.

Everyone is the other, and no one is himself. The “they”, which supplies
the  answer  to  the  question  of  the  “who”  of  everyday  Dasein,  is  the
“nobody” to  whom  every  Dasein  has  already  surrendered  itself  in  Being-
among-one-other [Untereinandersein].

In these characters of Being which we have exhibited—everyday Being-
among-one-another,  distantiality,  averageness,  levelling  down,  publicness,
the disburdening of one’s Being, and accommodation—lies that ‘constancy’
of  Dasein  which  is  closest  to  us.  This  “constancy”  pertains  not  to  the
enduring Being-present-at-hand of something, but rather to Dasein’s kind of
Being as Being-with. Neither the Self of one’s own Dasein nor the Self of
the Other has as yet found itself or lost itself as long as it is [seiend] in the
modes  we  have  mentioned.  In  these  modes  one’s  way  of  Being  is  that  of
inauthenticity  and  failure  to  stand  by  one’s  Self.(1)  To  be  in  this  way

signifies  no  lessening  of  Dasein’s  facticity,  just  as  the  “they”,  as  the
“nobody”,  is  by  no  means  nothing  at  all.  On  the  contrary,  in  this  kind  of
Being, Dasein is an ens realissimum, if by ‘Reality’ we understand a Being
that has the character of Dasein.
 

1.  ‘Man  ist  in  der  Weise  der  Unselbständigkeit  und  Uneigentlichkeit.’  On  ‘Ständigkeit’  and

‘Unselbständigkeit’ see our note 1, H. 117 above.

Of  course,  the  “they”  is  as  little  present-at-hand  as  Dasein  itself.  The
more openly the “they” behaves, the harder it is to grasp, and the slier it is,
but  the  less  is  it  nothing  at  all.  If  we  ‘see’  it  ontico-ontologically  with  an
unprejudiced eye, it reveals itself as the ‘Realest subject’ of everydayness.
And  even  if  it  is  not  accessible  like  a  stone  that  is  present-at-hand,  this  is
not  in  the  least  decisive  as  to  its  kind  of  Being.  One  may  neither  decree
prematurely that this “they” is ‘really’ nothing, nor profess the opinion that
one can Interpret this phenomenon ontologically by somehow ‘explaining’
it as what results from taking the Being-present-at-hand-together of several
subjects  and  then  fitting  them  together.  On  the  contrary,  in  working  out
concepts of Being one must direct one’s course by these phenomena, which
cannot be pushed aside.

H. 129

 

Furthermore, the “they” is not something like a ‘universal subject’ which
a plurality of subjects have hovering above them. One can come to take it
this  way  only  if  the  Being  of  such  ‘subjects’  is  understood  as  having  a
character other than that of Dasein, and if these are regarded as cases of a
genus  of  occurrents—cases  which  are  factually  present-at-hand.  With  this
approach, the only possibility ontologically is that everything which is not a
case of this sort is to be understood in the sense of genus and species. The
“they” is not the genus to which the individual Dasein belongs, nor can we
come  across  it  in  such  entities  as  an  abiding  characteristic.  That  even  the
traditional  logic  fails  us  when  confronted  with  these  phenomena,  is  not
surprising if we bear in mind that it has its foundation in an ontology of the
present-at-hand—an ontology which, moreover, is still a rough one. So no
matter  in  how  many  ways  this  logic  may  be  improved  and  expanded,  it
cannot  in  principle  be  made  any  more  flexible.  Such  reforms  of  logic,

oriented  towards  the  ‘humane  sciences’,  only  increase  the  ontological
confusion.

The “they” is an  e x i s t e n t i a l e; and as a primordial phenomenon,
it  belongs  to  Dasein’s  positive  constitution.  It  itself  has,  in  turn,  various
possibilities  of  becoming  concrete  as  something  characteristic  of  Dasein
[seiner  daseinsmässigen  Konkretion].  The  extent  to  which  its  dominion
becomes compelling and explicit may change in the course of history.

The  Self  of  everyday  Dasein  is  the  they-self,(1)  which  we  distinguish
from the authentic Self—that is, from the Self which has been taken hold of
in its own way [eigens ergriffenen]. As they-self, the particular Dasein has
been  dispersed  into  the  “they”,  and  must  first  find  itself.  This  dispersal
characterizes  the  ‘subject’  of  that  kind  of  Being  which  we  know  as
concernful absorption in the world we encounter as closest to us. If Dasein
is  familiar  with  itself  as  they-self,  this  means  at  the  same  time  that  the
“they” itself prescribes that way of interpreting the world and Being-in-the-
world which lies closest. Dasein is for the sake of the “they” in an everyday
manner,  and  the  “they”  itself  Articulates  the  referential  context  of
significance.(2)  When  entities  are  encountered,  Dasein’s  world  frees  them
for a totality of involvements with which the “they” is familiar, and within
the  limits  which  have  been  established  with  the  “they’s”  averageness.
Proximally, factical Dasein is in the with-world, which is discovered in an
average  way.  Proximally,  it  is  not  ‘I’,  in  the  sense  of  my  own  Self;  that
‘am’, but rather the Others, whose way is that of the “they”.(3) In terms of
the  “they”,  and  as  the  “they”,  I  am  ‘given’  proximally  to  ‘myself’  [mir
“selbst”]. Proximally Dasein is “they”, and for the most part it remains so.
If Dasein discovers the world in its own way [eigens] and brings it close, if
it  discloses  to  itself  its  own  authentic  Being,  then  this  discovery  of  the
‘world’  and  this  disclosure  of  Dasein  are  always  accomplished  as  a
clearing-away  of  concealments  and  obscurities,  as  a  breaking  up  of  the
disguises with which Dasein bars its own way.
 

1. ‘…das Man-selbst...’ This expression is also to be distinguished from ‘das Man selbst’ (‘the
“they”  itself’),  which  appears  elsewhere  in  this  paragraph.  In  the  first  of  these  expressions  ‘selbst’
appears as a substantive, in the second as a mere intensive.

2. 

‘Das  Man 

selbst,  worum-willen  das  Dasein 

artikuliert  den
Verweisungszusammenhang  der  Bedeutsamkeit.’  It  is  also  possible  to  construe  ‘alltäglich’  as  a
predicate  adjective  after  ‘ist’;  in  that  case  we  should  read:  ‘Dasein  is  everyday  for  the  sake  of  the
“they”.’

alltäglich 

ist, 

3. ‘Zunächst “bin”  nicht  “ich”  im  Sinne  des  eigenen  Selbst,  sondern  die  Anderen  in  der  Weise
des Man.’ In the earlier editions there are commas after ‘ “ich” ’ and ‘Anderen’, which would suggest
a somewhat different interpretation.

With  this  Interpretation  of  Being-with  and  Being-one’s-Self  in  the
“they”, the  question  of the  “who”  of the  everydayness of Being-with-one-
another is answered. These considerations have at the same time brought us
a concrete understanding of the basic constitution of Dasein: Being-in-the-
world, in its everydayness and its averageness, has become visible.

H. 130

 

From the kind of Being which belongs to the “they”—the kind which is
closest—everyday Dasein draws  its pre-ontological way  of interpreting its
Being.  In the  first  instance ontological  Interpretation  follows  the  tendency
to  interpret  it  this  way:  it  understands  Dasein  in  terms  of  the  world  and
comes across it as an entity within-the-world. But that is not all: even that
meaning  of  Being  on  the  basis  of  which  these  ‘subject’  entities  [diese
seienden “Subjekte”] get understood, is one which that ontology of Dasein
which  is  ‘closest’  to  us  lets  itself  present  in  terms  of  the  ‘world’.  But
because  the  phenomenon  of  the  world  itself  gets  passed  over  in  this
absorption in the world, its place gets taken [tritt an seine Stelle] by what is
present-at-hand  within-the-world,  namely,  Things.  The  Being  of  those
entities which are there with  us,  gets conceived as presence-at-hand. Thus
by  exhibiting  the  positive  phenomenon  of  the  closest  everyday  Being-in-
the-world, we have made it possible to get an insight into the reason why an
ontological Interpretation of this state of Being has been missing. This very
state of Being,(1) in  its everyday kind  of  Being,  is  what proximally  misses
itself and covers itself up.

If the Being of everyday Being-with-one-another is already different in
principle  from  pure  presence-at-hand—in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  is
seemingly close to it ontologically—still less can the Being of the authentic
Self be conceived as presence-at-hand. Authentic Being-one’s-Self does not
rest upon an exceptional condition of the subject, a condition that has been
detached  from  the  “they”;  it  is  rather  an  existentiell  modification  of  the
“they”—of the “they” as an essential  e x i s t e n t i a l e.

But in that case there is ontologically a gap separating the selfsameness
of  the  authentically  existing  Self  from  the  identity  of  that  “I”  which

maintains itself throughout its manifold Experiences.
 

1. We interpret Heidegger’s pronoun ‘Sie’ as referring to ‘Seinsverfassung’ (‘state of Being’); but
there are other words in the previous sentence to which it might refer with just as much grammatical
plausibility, particularly ‘Interpretation’.

V: BEING-IN AS SUCH

28. The Task of a Thematic Analysis of Being-in

 

 

 

H. 131

IN  the  preparatory  stage  of  the  existential  analytic  of  Dasein,  we  have
for our leading theme this entity’s basic state, Being-in-the-World. Our first
aim is to bring into relief phenomenally the unitary primordial structure of
Dasein’s Being, in terms of which its possibilities and the ways for it ‘to be’
are ontologically determined. Up till now, our phenomenal characterization
of Being-in-the-world  has been directed towards  the  world, as a structural
item of Being-in-the-world, and has attempted to provide an answer to the
question about the “who” of this entity in its everydayness. But even in first
marking out the tasks of a preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein, we
have already provided an advance orientation as to Being-in as such,(i) and
have illustrated it in the concrete mode of knowing the world.(ii)

The  fact  that  we  foresaw  this  structural  item  which  carries  so  much
weight, arose from our aim of setting the analysis of single items, from the
outset,  within  the  frame  of  a  steady  preliminary  view  of  the  structural
whole,  and  of  guarding  against  any  disruption  or  fragmentation  of  the
unitary phenomenon. Now, keeping in mind what has been achieved in the
concrete  analysis  of  the  world  and  the  “who”,  we  must  turn  our
Interpretation  back  to  the  phenomenon  of  Being-in.  By  considering  this
more  penetratingly,  however,  we  shall  not  only  get  a  new  and  surer
phenomenological view of the structural totality of Being-in-the-world, but
shall also pave the way to grasping the primordial Being of Dasein itself—
namely, care.

But  what  more  is  there  to  point  out  in  Being-in-the-world,  beyond  the
essential  relations  of  Being  alongside  the  world  (concern),  Being-with
(solicitude),  and  Being-one’s-Self  (“who”)?  If  need  be,  there  still  remains
the  analysis  by  characterizing
the  possibility  of  broadening  out 

comparatively  the  variations  of  concern  and  its  circumspection,  of
solicitude  and  the  considerateness  which  goes  with  it;  there  is  also  the
possibility of contrasting Dasein with entities whose character is not that of
Dasein  by  a  more  precise  explication  of  the  Being  of  all  possible  entities
within-the-world. Without question, there are unfinished tasks still lying in
this field. What we have hitherto set forth needs to be rounded out in many
ways  by  working  out  fully  the  existential  a  priori  of  philosophical
anthropology  and  taking  a  look  at  it.  But  this  is  not  the  aim  of  our
investigation. Its  aim  is  one  of  fundamental  ontology. Consequently,  if  we
inquire  about  Being-in  as  our  theme,  we  cannot  indeed  consent  to  nullify
the  primordial  character  of  this  phenomenon  by  deriving  it  from  others—
that is  to  say, by an inappropriate  analysis,  in  the  sense  of a dissolving or
breaking up. But the fact that something primordial is underivable does not
rule out the possibility that a multiplicity of characteristics of Being may be
constitutive  for  it.  If  these  show  themselves,  then  existentially  they  are
equiprimordial.  The  phenomenon  of  the  equiprimordiality  of  constitutive
items  has  often  been  disregarded 
in  ontology,  because  of  a
methodologically unrestrained tendency to  derive everything  and anything
from some simple ‘primal ground’.
 

i. Cf. Section 12, H. 52 ff.
ii. Cf. Section 13, H. 59—63.

H. 132

 

In which direction must we look, if we are to characterize Being-in, as
such, phenomenally? We get the answer to this question by recalling what
we were charged with keeping phenomenologically in view when we called
attention to this phenomenon: Being-in is distinct from the present-at-hand
insideness of something present-at-hand ‘in’ something else that is present-
at-hand; Being-in is not a characteristic that is effected, or even just elicited,
in a present-at-hand subject by the ‘world’s’ Being-present-at-hand; Being-
in is rather an essential kind of Being of this entity itself. But in that case,
what else is presented with this phenomenon than the commercium which is
present-at-hand between a subject present-at-hand and an Object present-at-
hand? Such an interpretation would come closer to the phenomenal content
if we were to say that Dasein is the Being of this ‘between’. Yet to take our

orientation from this ‘between’ would still be misleading. For with such an
orientation we would also be covertly assuming the entities between which
this “between”, as such, ‘is’, and we would be doing so in a way which is
ontologically vague. The “between” is already conceived as the result of the
convenientia  of  two  things  that  are  present-at-hand.  But  to  assume  these
beforehand always splits the phenomenon asunder, and there is no prospect
of  putting  it  together  again  from  the  fragments.  Not  only  do  we  lack  the
‘cement’; even the ‘schema’ in accordance with which this joining-together
is  to  be  accomplished,  has  been  split  asunder,  or  never  as  yet  unveiled.
What is decisive for ontology is to prevent the splitting of the phenomenon
—in  other  words,  to  hold  its  positive  phenomenal  content  secure.  To  say
that  for  this  we  need  far-reaching  and  detailed  study,  is  simply  to  express
the  fact  that  something  which  was  ontically  self-evident  in  the  traditional
way  of  treating  the  ‘problem  of  knowledge’  has  often  been  ontologically
disguised to the point where it has been lost sight of altogether.

The entity which is essentially constituted by Being-in-the-world is itself
in every case its ‘there’. According to the familiar signification of the word,
the  ‘there’  points  to  a  ‘here’  and  a  ‘yonder’.  The  ‘here’  of  an  ‘I-here’  is
always understood in relation to a ‘yonder’ ready-to-hand, in the sense of a
Being towards this ‘yonder’—a Being which is de-severant, directional, and
concernful.  Dasein’s  existential  spatiality,  which  thus  determines  its
‘location’,  is  itself  grounded  in  Being-in-the-world.  The  “yonder”  belongs
definitely to something encountered within-the-world. ‘Here’ and ‘yonder’
are possible only in a ‘there’—that is to say, only if there is an entity which
has made a disclosure of spatiality  as the  Being  of the  ‘there’.  This  entity
carries  in  its  ownmost  Being  the  character  of  not  being  closed  off.  In  the
expression ‘there’ we have in view this essential disclosedness. By reason
of this disclosedness, this entity (Dasein), together with the Being-there(1)
of the world, is ‘there’ for itself.

H. 133

 

When  we  talk  in  an  ontically  figurative  way  of  the  lumen  naturale  in
man,  we  have  in  mind  nothing  other  than  the  existential-ontological
structure of this entity, that it is in such a way as to be its “there”. To say
that it is ‘illuminated’ [“erleuchtet”] means that as Being-in-the-world  it is
cleared [gelichtet] in itself, not through any other entity, but in such a way

that  it  is  itself  the  clearing.(2)  Only  for  an  entity  which  is  existentially
cleared in this way does that which is present-at-hand become accessible in
the light or hidden in the dark. By its very nature, Dasein brings its “there”
along  with  it.  If  it  lacks  its  “there”,  it  is  not  factically  the  entity  which  is
essentially  Dasein;  indeed,  it  is  not  this  entity  at  all.  Dasein  is  its
disclosedness.
 

1. ‘Da-sein’. See our note 1, H. 7 above.
2.  ‘Lichtung’.  This  word  is  customarily  used  to  stand  for  a  ‘clearing’  in  the  woods,  not  for  a
‘clarification’; the verb ‘lichten’ is similarly used. The force of this passage lies in the fact that these
words are cognates of the noun ‘Licht’ (‘light’).

We  are  to  set  forth  the  Constitution  of  this  Being.  But  in  so  far  as  the
essence of this entity is existence, the existential proposition, ‘Dasein is its
disclosedness’, means at the same time that the Being which is an issue for
this entity in its very Being is to be its ‘there’. In addition to characterizing
the primary Constitution of the Being of disclosedness, we will require, in
conformity with the course of the analysis, an Interpretation of the kind of
Being in which this entity is its “there” in an everyday manner.

This chapter, in which we shall undertake the explication of Being-in as
such (that is to say, of the Being of the “there”), breaks up into two parts: A.
the  existential  Constitution  of  the  “there”;  B.  the  everyday  Being  of  the
“there”, and the falling of Dasein.

In  understanding  and  state-of-mind,  we  shall  see  the  two  constitutive
ways of being the “there”; and these are equiprimordial. If these are to be
analysed,  some  phenomenal  confirmation  is  necessary;  in  both  cases  this
will be attained by Interpreting some concrete mode which is important for
the  subsequent  problematic.  State-of-mind  and  understanding  are
characterized equiprimordially by discourse.

Under  A  (the  existential  Constitutuon  of  the  “there”)  we  shall
accordingly treat: Being-there as state-of-mind (Section 29); fear as a mode
of  state-of-mind  (Section  30);  Being-there  as  understanding  (Section  31);
understanding  and  interpretation  (Section  32);  assertion  as  a  derivative
mode  of  interpretation  (Section  33);  Being-there,  discourse,  and  language
(Section 34).

The  analysis  of  the  characteristics  of  the  Being  of  Being-there  is  an
existential  one.  This  means  that  the  characteristics  are  not  properties  of

 

 

 

something present-at-hand, but essentially existential ways to be. We must
therefore set forth their kind of Being in everydayness.

H. 134

Under B (the everyday Being of the “there”, and the falling of Dasein)
we  shall  analyse  idle  talk  (Section  35),  curiosity  (Section  36),  and
ambiguity  (Section  37)  as  existential  modes  of  the  everyday  Being  of  the
“there”;  we  shall  analyse  them  as  corresponding  respectively  to  the
constitutive  phenomenon  of  discourse, 
in
understanding,  and  the  interpretation  (or  explaining  [Deutung])  which
belongs to understanding. In these phenomenal modes a basic kind of Being
of the “there” will become visible—a kind of Being which we Interpret as
falling;  and  this  ‘falling’  shows  a  movement  [Bewegtheit]  which  is
existentially its own.(1)

the  sight  which 

lies 

A. The Existential Constitution of the “There”

29. Being there as State-of-mind

What  we  indicate  ontologically  by  the  term  “state-of-mind”(2)  is
ontically the most familiar and everyday sort of thing; our mood, our Being-
attuned.(3) Prior to all psychology of moods, a field which in any case still
lies  fallow,  it  is  necessary  to  see  this  phenomenon  as  a  fundamental
existentiale, and to outline its structure.
 

1.  While  we  shall  ordinarily  reserve  the  word  ‘falling’  for  ‘Verfallen’  (see  our  note  2,  H.  21
above), in this sentence it represents first ‘Verfallen’ and then ‘Fallen’, the usual German word for
‘falling’. ‘Fallen’ and ‘Verfallen’ are by no means strictly synonymous; the latter generally has the
further connotation of ‘decay’ or ‘deterioration’, though Heidegger will take pains to point out that in
his own usage it ‘does not express any negative evaluation’. See Section 38 below.

2. ‘Befindlichkeit’. More literally: ‘the state in which one may be found’. (The common German
expression ‘Wie befinden Sie sich?’ means simply ‘How are you?’ or ‘How are you feeling?’) Our
translation, ‘state-of-mind’, comes fairly close to what is meant; but it should be made clear that the
‘of-mind’ belongs to English idiom, has no literal counterpart in the structure of the German word,
and fails to bring out the important connotation of finding oneself.

3. ‘…die Stimmung, das Gestimmtsein.’ The noun ‘Stimmung’ originally means the tuning of a
musical instrument, but it has taken on several other meanings and is the usual word for one’s mood
or  humour.  We  shall  usually  translate  it  as  ‘mood’,  and  we  shall  generally  translate  both

‘Gestimmtsein’  and  ‘Gestimmtheit’  as  ‘having  a  mood’,  though  sometimes,  as  in  the  present
sentence,  we  prefer  to  call  attention  to  the  root  metaphor  of  ‘Gestimmtsein’  by  writing  ‘Being-
attuned’, etc.

Both  the  undisturbed  equanimity  and  the  inhibited  ill-humour  of  our
everyday  concern,  the  way  we  slip  over  from  one  to  the  other,  or  slip  off
into  bad  moods,  are  by  no  means  nothing  ontologically,(1)  even  if  these
phenomena  are  left  unheeded  as  supposedly  the  most  indifferent  and
fleeting in Dasein. The fact that moods can deteriorate [verdorben werden]
and change over means simply that in every case Dasein always has some
mood  [gestimmt 
lack  of  mood
ist].  The  pallid,  evenly  balanced 
[Ungestimmtheit], which is often persistent and which is not to be mistaken
for  a bad mood,  is  far  from nothing at  all. Rather,  it is  in  this that Dasein
becomes satiated with itself. Being has become manifest as a burden. Why
that should be, one does not know. And Dasein cannot know anything of the
sort because the possibilities of disclosure which belong to cognition reach
far  too  short  a  way  compared  with  the  primordial  disclosure  belonging  to
moods,  in  which  Dasein  is  brought  before  its  Being  as  “there”.
Furthermore, a mood of elation can alleviate the manifest burden of Being;
that  such  a  mood  is  possible  also  discloses  the  burdensome  character  of
Dasein, even while it alleviates the burden. A mood makes manifest ‘how
one is, and how one is faring’ [“wie einem ist und wird”]. In this ‘how one
is’, having a mood brings Being to its “there”.

H. 135

 

In having a mood, Dasein is always disclosed moodwise as that entity to
which  it  has  been  delivered  over  in  its  Being;  and  in  this  way  it  has  been
delivered  over  to  the  Being  which,  in  existing,  it  has  to  be.  “To  be
disclosed” does not mean “to be known as this sort of thing”. And even in
the most indifferent and inoffensive everydayness the Being of Dasein can
burst forth as a naked ‘that it is and has to be’ [als nacktes “Dass es es ist
und zu sein hat”].The pure ‘that it is’ shows itself, but the “whence” and the
“whither” remain  in  darkness.  The fact that it is  just as everyday  a matter
for Dasein not to ‘give in’ [“nachgibt”] to such moods—in other words, not
to  follow  up  [nachgeht]  their  disclosure  and  allow  itself  to  be  brought
before  that  which  is  disclosed—is  no  evidence  against  the  phenomenal
facts of the case, in which the Being of the “there” is disclosed moodwise in

its “that-it-is”;(2) it is rather evidence for it. In an ontico-existentiell sense,
Dasein for the most part evades the Being which is disclosed in the mood.
In  an  ontologico-existential  sense,  this  means  that  even  in  that  to  which
such  a  mood  pays  no  attention,  Dasein  is  unveiled  in  its  Being-delivered-
over to the “there”. In the evasion itself the “there” is something disclosed.
 

1. In this sentence ‘equanimity’ represents ‘Gleichmut’, ‘ill-humour’ represents ‘Missmut’, and

‘bad moods’ represents ‘Verstimmungen’.

2. ‘…den phänomenalen Tatbestand der stimmungsmässigen Erschlossenheit des Seins des Da in
seinem Dass...’ It would be more literal to write simply ‘in its “that” ’; but to avoid a very natural
confusion  between  the  conjunction  ‘that’  and  pronoun  ‘that’,  we  shall  translate  ‘das  Dass’  as  ‘the
“that-it-is” ’, even though we use the same expression unhyphenated for ‘das “Dass es ist” ’ in this
paragraph  and  in  that  which  follows.  (The  striking  contrast  between  the  ‘Da’  and  the  ‘Dass’  is  of
course lost in translation.)

This  characteristic  of  Dasein’s  Being—this  ‘that  it  is’—is  veiled  in  its
“whence” and “whither”, yet disclosed in itself all the more unveiledly; we
call it the “thrownness”(1) of this entity into its “there”; indeed, it is thrown
in such a way that, as Being-in-the-world, it is the “there”. The expression
“thrownness” is meant to suggest the facticity of its being delivered over.(2)
The ‘that it is and has to be’ which is disclosed in Dasein’s state-of-mind is
not  the  same  ‘that-it-as’  which  expresses  ontologico-categorially  the
factuality belonging to presence-at-hand. This factuality becomes accessible
only if we ascertain it by looking at it. The “that-it-is” which is disclosed in
Dasein’s  state-of-mind  must  rather  be  conceived  as  an  existential  attribute
of the entity which has Being-in-the-world as its way of Being. Facticity is
not the factuality of the  f a c t u m  b r u t u  m  of  something  present-at-
hand, but a characteristic of Dasein’s Being—one which has been taken up
into existence, even if proximally it has been thrust aside. The “that-it-is” of
facticity never becomes something that we can come across by beholding it.
An  entity  of  the  character  of  Dasein  is  its  “there”  in  such  a  way  that,
whether explicitly or not, it finds itself [sich befindet] in its thrownness. In a
state-of-mind Dasein is always brought before itself, and has always found
itself, not in the sense of coming across itself by perceiving itself, but in the
sense  of  finding  itself  in  the  mood  that  it  has.(3)  As  an  entity  which  has
been delivered over to its Being, it remains also delivered over to the fact
that it must always have found itself—but found itself in a way of finding
which arises not so much from a direct seeking as rather from a fleeing. The
way  in  which  the  mood  discloses  is  not  one  in  which  we  look  at

thrownness,  but  one  in  which  we  turn  towards  or  turn  away  [An-  und
Abkehr]. For the most part the mood does not turn towards the burdensome
character of Dasein which is manifest in it, and least of all does it do so in
the  mood  of  elation  when  this  burden  has  been  alleviated.  It  is  always  by
way of a state-of-mind that this turning-away is what it is.
 

1. ‘Geworfenheit’. This important term, which Heidegger introduces here, is further discussed in

Section 38.

2.  ‘Der  Ausdruck  Geworfenheit  soll  die  Faktizität  der  Überantwortung  andeuten.’  On  the

distinction between ‘facticity’ and ‘factuality’, see H. 56 above.

3. In this sentence there is a contrast between ‘wahrnehmendes Sich-vorfinden’ (‘coming across
itself by perceiving’) and ‘gestimmtes Sichbefinden’ (‘finding itself in the mood that it has’). In the
next sentence, on the other hand, ‘found’ and ‘finding’ represent ‘gefunden’ and ‘Finden’.

H. 136

 

Phenomenally,  we  would  wholly  fail  to  recognize  both  what  mood
discloses  and  how  it  discloses,  if  that  which  is  disclosed  were  to  be
compared with what Dasein is acquainted with, knows, and believes ‘at the
same time’ when it has such a mood. Even if Dasein is ‘assured’ in its belief
about  its  ‘whither’,  or  if,  in  rational  enlightenment,  it  supposes  itself  to
know  about  its  “whence”,  all  this  counts  for  nothing  as  against  the
phenomenal facts of the case: for the mood brings Dasein before the “that-
it-is”  of  its  “there”,  which,  as  such,  stares  it  in  the  face  with  the
inexorability  of  an  enigma.(1)  From  the  existential-ontological  point  of
view, there is not the slightest justification for minimizing what is ‘evident’
in  states-of-mind,  by  measuring  it  against  the  apodictic  certainty  of  a
theoretical  cognition  of  something  which  is  purely  present-at-hand.
However the phenomena are no less falsified when they are banished to the
sanctuary  of  the  irrational.  When  irrationalism,  as  the  counterplay  of
rationalism, talks about the things to which rationalism is blind, it does so
only with a squint.
 

1. ‘...so verschlägt das alles nichts gegen den phänomenalen Tatbestand, dass die Stimmung das
Dasein  vor  das  Dass  seines  Da  bringt,  als  welches  es  ihm  in  unerbittlicher  Rätselhaftigkeit
entgegenstarrt.’ The pronoun ‘es’ (the reference of which is not entirely unambiguous) appears only
in the later editions.

Factically,  Dasein  can,  should,  and  must,  through  knowledge  and  will,
become master of its moods; in certain possible ways of existing, this may

signify a priority of volition and cognition. Only we must not be misled by
this into denying that ontologically mood is a primordial kind of Being for
Dasein,  in  which  Dasein  is  disclosed  to  itself  prior  to  all  cognition  and
volition,  and beyond their  range  of  disclosure.  And  furthermore,  when  we
master a mood, we do so by way of a counter-mood; we are never free of
moods. Ontologically, we thus obtain as the first essential  characteristic  of
states-of-mind that they disclose Dasein in its thrownness, and—proximally
and for the most part—in the manner of an evasive turning-away.

From what has been said we can see already that a state-of-mind is very
remote from anything like coming across a psychical condition by the kind
of  apprehending  which  first  turns  round  and  then  back.  Indeed  it  is  so  far
from  this,  that  only  because  the  “there”  has  already  been  disclosed  in  a
state-of-mind  can  immanent  reflection  come  across  ‘Experiences’  at  all.
The 
the  “there”  more  primordially,  but
correspondingly it closes it off more stubbornly than any not-perceiving.

‘bare  mood’  discloses 

H. 137

 

This  is  shown  by  bad moods.  In  these,  Dasein  becomes  blind  to  itself,
the environment with which it is concerned veils itself, the circumspection
of  concern  gets  led  astray.  States-of-mind  are  so  far  from  being  reflected
upon,  that  precisely  what  they  do  is  to  assail  Dasein  in  its  unreflecting
devotion to the ‘world’ with which it is concerned and on which it expends
itself. A mood assails us. It comes neither from ‘outside’ nor from ‘inside’,
but arises out of Being-in-the-world, as a way of such Being. But with the
negative distinction between state-of-mind and the reflective apprehending
of  something  ‘within’,  we  have  thus  reached  a  positive  insight  into  their
character  as  disclosure.  The  mood  has  already  disclosed,  in  every  case,
Being-in-the-world  as  a  whole,  and  makes  it  possible  first  of  all  to  direct
oneself towards something. Having a mood is not related to the psychical in
the  first  instance,  and  is  not  itself  an  inner  condition  which  then  reaches
forth in an enigmatical way and puts its mark on Things and persons. It is in
this  that  the  second essential  characteristic  of  states-of-mind  shows  itself.
We  have  seen 
the  world,  Dasein-with,  and  existence  are
equiprimordially  disclosed; and  state-of-mind  is  a  basic  existential  species
of their dislosedness, because this disclosedness itself is essentially Being-
in-the-world.(1)

that 

Besides these two essential characteristics of states-of-mind which have
been explained—the disclosing of thrownness and the current disclosing of
Being-in-the-world  as  a  whole—we  have  to  notice  a  third,  which
contributes  above  all  towards  a  more  penetrating  understanding  of  the
worldhood  of  the  world.  As  we  have  said  earlier,(iii)  the  world  which  has
already  been  disclosed  beforehand  permits  what  is  within-the-world  to  be
encountered. This prior disclosedness of the world belongs to Being-in and 
is  partly  constituted  by  one’s  state-of-mind.  Letting  something  be
encountered is primarily circumspective; it is not just sensing something, or
staring  at  it.  It  implies  circumspective  concern,  and  has  the  character  of
becoming affected in some way [Betroffenwerdens]; we can see this more
precisely  from  the  standpoint  of  state-of-mind.  But  to  be  affected  by  the
unserviceable,  resistant,  or  threatening  character  [Bedrohlichkeit]  of  that
which  is  ready-to-hand,  becomes  ontologically  possible  only  in  so  far  as
Being-in  as  such  has  been  determined  existentially  beforehand  in  such  a
manner  that  what  it  encounters  within-the-world  can  “matter” to it  in  this
way. The fact that this sort of thing can “matter” to it is grounded in one’s
state-of-mind; and as a state-of-mind it has already disclosed the world—as
something  by  which  it  can  be  threatened,  for  instance.(2)  Only  something
which is in the state-of-mind of fearing (or fearlessness) can discover that
what is environmentally ready-to-hand is threatening. Dasein’s openness to
the world is constituted existentially by the attunement of a state-of-mind.
 

iii. Cf. Section 18, H. 83 ff.

1. ‘…weil diese selbst wesenhaft In-der-Welt-sein ist.’ It is not clear whether the antecedent of

‘diese’ is ‘Existenz’ (‘existence’) or ‘Erschlossenheit’ (‘disclosedness’).

2. ‘Diese Angänglichkeit gründet in der Befindlichkeit, als welche sie die Welt zum Beispiel auf

Bedrohbarkeit hin erschlossen hat.’ The pronoun ‘sie’ appears only in the newer editions.

 

 

H. 138

And only because the ‘senses’ [die “Sinne”] belong ontologically to an
entity  whose  kind  of  Being  is  Being-in-the-world  with  a  state-of-mind,(1)
can they be ‘touched’ by anything or ‘have a sense for’ [“Sinn haben für”]
something in such a way that what touches them shows itself in an affect.(2)
Under  the  strongest  pressure  and  resistance,  nothing  like  an  affect  would
remain  essentially
come  about,  and 

itself  would 

resistance 

the 

undiscovered, if Being-in-the-world, with its state-of-mind, had not already
submitted itself [sich schon angewiesen] to having entities within-the-world
“matter”  to  it  in  a  way  which  its  moods  have  outlined  in  advance.
Existentially,  a  state-of-mind  implies  a  disclosive  submission  to  the  world,
out  of  which  we  can  encounter  something  that  matters  to  us.  Indeed from
the  ontological  point  of  view  we  must  as  a  general  principal  leave  the
primary discovery  of  the  world  to  ‘bare  mood’.  Pure  beholding,  even  if  it
were to penetrate to the innermost core of the Being of something present-
at-hand, could never discover anything like that which is threatening.
 

1. ‘befindlichen In-der-Welt-seins’. In previous chapters we have usually translated ‘befindlich’
by such expressions as ‘which is to be found’, etc. See, for instance, H. 67, 70, 117 above, where this
adjective is applied to a number of things which are hardly of the character of Dasein. In the present
chapter,  however,  the  word  is  tied  up  with  the  special  sense  of  ‘Befindlichkeit’  as  ‘state-of-mind’,
and will be translated by expressions such as ‘with a state-of-mind’, ‘having a state-of-mind’, etc.

2.  In  this  sentence  Heidegger  has  been  calling  attention  to  two  ways  of  using  the  word  ‘Sinn’
which might well be expressed by the word ‘sense’ but hardly by the word ‘meaning’: (1) ‘die Sinne’
as ‘the five senses’ or the ‘senses’ one has when one is ‘in one’s senses’; (2) ‘der Sinn’ as the ‘sense’
one  has  ‘for’  something—one’s  ‘sense  for  clothes’,  one’s  ‘sense  of  beauty’,  one’s  ‘sense  of  the
numinous’, etc. Cf. the discussion of ‘Sinn’ on H. 151 f. below.

The  fact  that,  even  though  states-of-mind  are  primarily  disclosive,
everyday  circumspection  goes  wrong  and  to  a  large  extent  succumbs  to
delusion because of them, is a μὴ ὄν [non-being] when measured against the
idea of knowing the ‘world’ absolutely. But if we make evaluations which
are  so  unjustified  ontologically,  we  shall  completely  fail  to  recognize  the
existentially  positive  character  of  the  capacity  for  delusion.  It  is  precisely
when  we  see  the  ‘world’  unsteadily  and  fitfully  in  accordance  with  our
moods, that the ready-to-hand shows itself in its specific worldhood, which
is never the same from day to day. By looking at the world theoretically, we
have already dimmed it down to the uniformity of what is purely present-at-
hand,  though  admittedly  this  uniformity  comprises  a  new  abundance  of
things which can be discovered by simply characterizing them. Yet even the
purest θεωρία [theory] has not left all moods behind it; even when we look
theoretically at what is just present-at-hand, it does not show itself purely as
it  looks  unless  this  θεωρία  lets  it  come  towards  us  in  a  tranquil  tarrying
alongside..., in ῥαστώνη and διαγωγή.(iv) Any cognitive determining has its
existential-ontological  Constitution  in  the  state-of-mind  of  Being-in-the-
world;  but  pointing  this  out  is  not  to  be  confused  with  attempting  to
surrender science ontically to ‘feeling’.

The  different  modes  of  state-of-mind  and  the  ways  in  which  they  are
interconnected  in  their  foundations  cannot  be  Interpreted  within  the
problematic  of  the  present  investigation.  The  phenomena  have  long  been
well-known  ontically  under  the  terms  “affects”  and  “feelings”  and  have
always been under consideration in philosophy. It is not an accident that the
earliest systematic Interpretation of affects that has come down to us is not
treated  in  the  framework  of  ‘psychology’.  Aristotle  investigates  the  πάθη
[affects]  in  the  second  book  of  his  Rhetoric.  Contrary  to  the  traditional
orientation, according to which rhetoric is conceived as the kind of thing we
‘learn in school’, this work of Aristotle must be taken as the first systematic
hermeneutic of the everydayness of Being with one another. Publicness, as
the kind of Being which belongs to the “they” (Cf. Section 27), not only has
in  general  its  own  way  of  having  a  mood,  but  needs  moods  and  ‘makes’
them for itself. It is into such a mood and out of such a mood that the orator
speaks.  He  must  understand  the  possibilities  of  moods  in  order  to  rouse
them and guide them aright.
 

iv. Cf. Aristotle, Metaphysica A 2, 982 b 22 sqq. [‘comfort and recreation’—Ross].

H. 139

 

How the Interpretation of the affects was carried further in the Stoa, and
how it was  handed down to  modern  times through  patristic and scholastic
theology,  is  well  known.  What  has  escaped  notice  is  that  the  basic
ontological  Interpretation  of  the  affective  life  in  general  has  been  able  to
make scarcely one forward step worthy of mention since Aristotle. On the
contrary,  affects  and  feelings  come  under  the  theme  of  psychical
phenomena,  functioning  as  a  third  class  of  these,  usually  along  with
ideation [Vorstellen] and volition. They sink to the level of accompanying
phenomena.

It  has  been  one  of  the  merits  of  phenomenological  research  that  it  has
again brought these phenomena more unrestrictedly into our sight. Not only
that:  Scheler,  accepting  the  challenges  of  Augustine  and  Pascal,(v)  has
guided the problematic to a consideration of how acts which ‘represent’ and
acts  which  ‘take  an  interest’  are  interconnected  in  their  foundations.  But
even here the existential-ontological foundations of the phenomenon of the
act in general are admittedly still obscure.

A  state-of-mind  not  only  discloses  Dasein  in  its  thrownness  and  its
submission to that world which is already disclosed with its own Being; it is
itself  the  existential  kind  of  Being  in  which  Dasein  constantly  surrenders
itself  to  the  ‘world’  and  lets  the  ‘world’  “matter”  to  it  in  such  a  way  that
somehow  Dasein  evades  its  very  self.  The  existential  constitution  of  such
evasion will become clear in the phenomenon of falling.
 

v. Cf. Pascal, Pensées, [ed. Brunschvicg, Paris, p. 185]. ‘Et de là vient qu’au lieu qu’en parlant
des choses humaines on dit qu’il faut les connaître avant que de les aimer, ce qui a passé en proverbe,
les saints au contraire disent en parlant des choses divines qu’il faut les aimer pour les connaître, et
qu’on  n’entre  dans  la  vérité  que  par  la  charité,  dont  ils  ont  fait  une  de  leurs  plus  utiles  sentences.’
[‘And thence it comes about that in the case where we are speaking of human things, it is said to be
necessary to know them before we love them, and this has become a proverb; but the saints, on the
contrary, when they speak of divine things, say that we must love them before we know them, and
that we enter into truth only by charity; they have made of this one of their most useful maxims’.—
Tr.] Cf. with this, Augustine, Opera, (Migne Patrologiae Latinae, tom. VIII), Contra Faustum, lib. 32,
cap. 18: ‘non intratur in veritatem, nisi per charitatem.’ [‘one does not enter into truth except through
charity’.—Tr.]

H. 140

 

A state-of-mind is a basic existential way in which Dasein is its “there”.
It  not  only  characterizes  Dasein  ontologically,  but,  because  of  what  it
discloses, it is at the same time methodologically significant in principle for
the existential analytic. Like any ontological Interpretation whatsoever, this
analytic  can  only,  so  to  speak,  “listen  in”  to  some  previously  disclosed
entity  as  regards  its  Being.  And  it  will  attach  itself  to  Dasein’s  distinctive
and most far-reaching possibilities of disclosure, in order to get information
about this entity from these. Phenomenological Interpretation must make it
possible for Dasein itself to disclose things primordially; it must, as it were,
let  Dasein  interpret  itself.  Such  Interpretation  takes  part  in  this  disclosure
only in order to raise to a conceptual level the phenomenal content of what
has been disclosed, and to do so existentially.

Later (Cf. Section 40)(1) we shall provide an Interpretation of anxiety as
such a basic state-of-mind of Dasein, and as one which is significant from
the  existential-ontological  standpoint;  with  this  in  view,  we  shall  now
illustrate  the  phenomenon  of  state-of-mind  even  more  concretely  in  its
determinate mode of fear.

30. Fear as a Mode of Stale-of-Mind

 

vi. Cf. Aristotle, Rhetorica B 5, 1382 a 20—1383 b II.

There are three points of view from which the phenomenon of fear may
be considered. We shall analyse: (1) that in  the  face  of which we  fear, (2)
fearing, and (3) that about which we fear. These possible ways of looking at
fear  are  not  accidental;  they  belong  together.  With  them  the  general
structure  of  states-of-mind  comes  to  the  fore.  We  shall  complete  our
analysis  by  alluding  to  the  possible  ways  in  which  fear  may  be  modified;
each of these pertains to different items in the structure of fear.

That  in  the  face  of  which  we  fear,  the  ‘fearsome’,(2)  is  in  every  case
something which we encounter within-the-world and which may have either
readiness-to-hand,  presence-at-hand,  or  Dasein-with  as  its  kind  of  Being.
We are not going to make an ontical report on those entities which can often
and  for  the  most  part  be  ‘fearsome’:  we  are  to  define  the  fearsome
phenomenally  in  its  fearsomeness.  What  do  we  encounter  in  fearing  that
belongs to the fearsome as such? That in the face of which we fear can be
characterized  as  threatening.  Here  several  points  must  be  considered.  1.
What we encounter has detrimentality as its kind of involvement. It shows
itself within a context of involvements. 2. The target of this detrimentality is
a definite range of what can be affected by it; thus the detrimentality is itself
made definite, and comes from a definite region. 3. The region itself is well
known  as  such,  and  so  is  that  which  is  coming  from  it;  but  that  which  is
coming  from  it  has  something  ‘queer’  about  it.(3)  4.  That  which  is
detrimental,  as  something  that  threatens  us,  is  not  yet  within  striking
distance  [in  beherrschbarer  Nähe],  but  it  is  coming  close.  In  such  a
drawing-close, 
its
the  detrimentality  radiates  out,  and 
threatening  character.  5.  This  drawing-close  is  within  what  is  close  by.
Indeed, something may be detrimental in the highest degree and may even
be  coming  constantly  closer;  but  if  it  is  still  far  off,  its  fearsomeness
remains  veiled.  If,  however,  that  which  is  detrimental  draws  close  and  is
close  by,  then  it  is  threatening:  it  can  reach  us,  and  yet  it  may  not.  As  it
draws close, this ‘it can, and yet in the end it may not’ becomes aggravated.
We say, “It is fearsome”. 6. This implies that what is detrimental as coming-
close close by carries with it the patent possibility that it may stay away and

therein 

lies 

pass  us  by;  but  instead  of  lessening  or  extinguishing  our  fearing,  this
enhances it.
 

1. The earliest editions cite Section 39 rather than Section 40. This has been corrected in the list

of errata.

2. ‘Das Wovor der Furcht, das Furchtbare…’
3. ‘…mit dem es nicht “geheuer” ist.’

H. 141

 

In  fearing  as  such,  what  we  have  thus  characterized  as  threatening  is
freed  and  allowed  to  matter  to  us.  We  do  not  first  ascertain  a  future  evil
(malum futurum) and then fear it. But neither does fearing first take note of
what is drawing close; it discovers it beforehand in its fearsomeness. And in
fearing, fear can then look at the fearsome explicitly, and ‘make it clear’ to
itself. Circumspection sees the fearsome because it has fear as its state-of-
mind. Fearing, as a slumbering possibility of Being-in-the-world in a state-
of-mind  (we  call  this  possibility  ‘fearfulness’  [“Furchtsamkeit”]),  has
already  disclosed  the  world,  in  that  out  of  it  something  like  the  fearsome
may  come  close.  The  potentiality  for  coming  close  is  itself  freed  by  the
essential existential spatiality of Being-in-the-world.

That which fear fears about is that very entity which is afraid—Dasein.
(1) Only an entity for which in its Being this very Being is an issue, can be
afraid. Fearing discloses this entity as endangered and abandoned to itself.
Fear always reveals Dasein in the Being of its “there”, even if it does so in
varying degrees of explicitness. If we fear about our house and home, this
cannot be cited as an instance contrary to the above definition of what we
fear  about;  for  as  Being-in-the-world,  Dasein  is  in  every  case  concernful
Being-alongside.(2) Proximally and for the most part, Dasein is in terms of
what  it  is  concerned  with.  When  this  is  endangered,  Being-alongside  is
threatened.  Fear  discloses  Dasein  predominantly  in  a  privative  way.  It
bewilders us and makes us ‘lose our heads’. Fear closes off our endangered
Being-in, and yet at the same time lets us see it, so that when the fear has
subsided, Dasein must first find its way about again.

Whether  privatively  or  positively,  fearing  about  something,  as  being-
afraid  in  the  face  of  something,  always  discloses  equiprimordially  entities
within-the-world and Being-in—the former as threatening and the latter as
threatened. Fear is a mode of state-of-mind.

1. ‘Das Worum die Furcht fürchtet, ist das sich fürchtende Seiende selbst, das Dasein.’ While it is
convenient to translate ‘das Worum der Furcht’ as ‘that which one fears about’, this expression must
be taken in a narrower sense than one would ordinarily expect in English. What Heidegger generally
has in mind is rather the person on whose behalf or for  whose sake one  fears.  (Cf.  our  remarks  on
‘um’  in  note  1,  H.  65,  and  note  2,  H.  69  above.)  Thus  ‘fürchten  um’  comes  closer  to  the  ordinary
meaning of ‘fear for’ than it does to that of ‘fear about’. We shall soon see, however, that Heidegger
also uses the expression ‘fürchten für’, for which ‘fear for’ would seem to be the natural translation.
Notice  that  what  he  then  has  in  mind—namely,  our  fearing  for  Others—is  only  a  special  case  of
‘fearing  for’  in  the  ordinary  English  sense,  and  likewise  only  a  special  case  of  what  we  shall  call
‘fearing about’ in this translation.

2. ‘Sein bei’. Here our usual translation, ‘Being-alongside’, fails to bring out the connection. A
German reader would recall at once that ‘bei’ may mean, ‘at the home of’ like the French ‘chez’. See
our note 3, H. 54 above.

 

 

H. 142

One can also fear about Others, and we then speak of “fearing for” them
[Fürchten  für  sie].  This  fearing  for  the  Other  does  not  take  away  his  fear.
Such a possibility has been ruled out already, because the Other, for whom
we fear, need not fear at all on his part. It is precisely when the Other is not
afraid and charges recklessly at what is threatening him that we fear most
for him. Fearing-for is a way of having a co-state-of-mind with Others, but
not  necessarily  a  being-afraid-with  or  even  a  fearing-with-one-another.(1)
One  can  “fear  about”  without  “being-afraid”.  Yet  when  viewed  more
strictly,  fearing-about  is  “being-afraid-for-oneself”.(2)  Here  what  one  “is
apprehensive about” is one’s Being-with with the Other, who might be torn
away from one.(3) That which is fearsome is not aimed directly at him who
fears  with  someone  else.  Fearing-about  knows  that  in  a  certain  way  it  is
unaffected, and yet it is co-affected in so far as the Dasein-with for which it
fears  is  affected.  Fearing-about  is  therefore  not  a  weaker  form  of  being-
afraid. Here the issue is one of existential modes, not of degrees of ‘feeling-
tones’.  Fearing-about  does  not  lose  its  specific  genuiness  even  if  it  is  not
‘really’ afraid.
 

1. ‘Fürchten für... ist eine Weise der Mitbefindlichkeit mit den Anderen, aber nicht notwendig ein

Sich-mitfürchten oder gar ein Miteinanderfürchten.’

2.  ‘ein  Sichfürchten’.  We  have  hitherto  translated  ‘sich  fürchten’  with  various  forms  of  ‘be
afraid’, which is its usual signification in ordinary German. In this passage, however, the emphasis on
the reflexive pronoun ‘sich’ clearly calls for ‘being-afraid-for-oneself’.

3. ‘ “Befürchtet” ist dabei das Mitsein mit dem Anderen, der einem entrissen werden könnte.’

There can be variations in the constitutive items of the full phenomenon
of  fear.  Accordingly,  different  possibilities  of  Being  emerge  in  fearing.
Bringing-close  close  by,  belongs  to  the  structure  of  the  threatening  as
encounterable. If something threatening breaks in suddenly upon concernful
Being-in-the-world  (something  threatening  in  its  ‘not  right  away,  but  any
moment’), fear becomes alarm [Erschrecken]. So, in what is threatening we
must distinguish between the closest way in which it brings itself close, and
the manner in which this bringing-close gets encountered—its suddenness.
That  in  the  face  of  which  we  are  alarmed  is  proximally  something  well
known and familiar. But if, on the other hand, that which threatens has the
character  of  something  altogether  unfamiliar,  then  fear  becomes  dread
[Grauen].  And  where  that  which  threatens  is  laden  with  dread,  and  is  at
same  time  encountered  with  suddenness  of  alarming,  then  fear  becomes
terror [Entsetzen]. There  are  further  variations  of  fear,  which  we  know  as
timidity,  shyness,  misgiving,  becoming  startled.  All  modifications  of  fear,
as  possibilities  of  having  a  state-of-mind,  point  to  the  fact  that  Dasein  as
Being-in-the-world is ‘fearful’ [“furchtsam”]. This ‘fearfulness’ is not to be
understood in an ontical sense as some factical ‘individualized’ disposition,
(1) but as an existential possibility of the essential state-of-mind of Dasein
in general, though of course it is not the only one.
 

1.  ‘…im  ontischen  Sinne  einer  faktischen,  “vereinzelten”  Veranlagung...’  While  the  verb
‘vereinzeln’  often  means  ‘to  isolate’,  Heidegger  does  not  ordinarily  use  it  in  this  sense.  Indeed  he
contrasts it with the verb ‘isolieren’. Cf. H. 188 below.

31. Being-there as Understanding

 

 

H. 143

State-of-mind is one of  the  existential  structures  in  which  the  Being  of
the ‘there’ maintains itself. Equiprimordial with it in constituting this Being
is understanding. A  state-of-mind  always  has  its  understanding,  even  if  it
merely  keeps  it  suppressed.  Understanding  always  has  its  mood.  If  we
Interpret understanding as a fundamental existentiale, this indicates that this
phenomenon is conceived as a basic mode of Dasein’s Being. On the other
hand, ‘understanding’ in the sense of one possible kind of cognizing among
others  (as  distinguished,  for  instance,  from  ‘explaining’),  must,  like

explaining,  be  Interpreted  as  an  existential  derivative  of  that  primary
understanding which is one of the constituents of the Being of the “there” in
general.

We have, after all, already come up against this primordial understanding
in  our  previous  investigations,  though  we  did  not  allow  it  to  be  included
explicitly in the theme under discussion. To say that in existing, Dasein is
its “there”, is equivalent to saying that the world is ‘there’; its Being-there is
Being-in.  And  the  latter  is  likewise  ‘there’,  as  that  for  the  sake  of  which
Dasein  is.  In  the  “for-the-sake-of-which”,  existing  Being-in-the-world  is
disclosed  as  such,  and  this  disclosedness  we  have  called  “understanding”.
(vii)  In  the  understanding  of  the  “for-the-sake-of-which”,  the  significance
which is grounded therein, is disclosed along with it. The disclosedness of
understanding,  as  the  disclosedness  of  the  “for-the-sake-of-which”  and  of
significance equiprimordially, pertains to the entirety of Being-in-the-world.
Significance is that on the basis of which the world is disclosed as such. To
say that the “for-the-sake-of-which” and significance  are  both  disclosed in
Dasein, means that Dasein is that entity which, as Being-in-the-world, is an
issue for itself.

When  we  are  talking  ontically  we  sometimes  use  the  expression
‘understanding something’ with the signification of ‘being able to manage
something’, ‘being a match for it’, ‘being competent to do something’.(1) In
understanding, as an existentiale, that which we have such competence over
is not a “what”, but Being as existing. The kind of Being which Dasein has,
as  potentiality-for-Being,  lies  existentially  in  understanding.  Dasein  is  not
something  present-at-hand  which  possesses  its  competence  for  something
by way of an extra; it is primarily Being-possible. Dasein is in every case
what  it  can  be,  and  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  its  possibility.  The  Being-
possible which is essential for Dasein, pertains to the ways of its solicitude
for  Others  and  of  its  concern  with  the  ‘world’,  as  we  have  characterized
them;  and  in  all  these,  and  always,  it  pertains  to  Dasein’s  potentiality-for-
Being  towards  itself,  for  the  sake  of  itself.  The  Being-possible  which
Dasein  is  existentially  in  every  case,  is  to  be  sharply  distinguished  both
from  empty  logical  possibility  and  from  the  contingency  of  something
present-at-hand, so far as with the present-at-hand this or that can ‘come to
pass’.(2)  As  a  modal  category  of  presence-at-hand,  possibility  signifies
what is not yet actual and what is not at any time necessary. It characterizes
the merely possible.  Ontologically  it is  on a lower level  than  actuality  and

necessity.  On  the  other  hand,  possibility  as  an  existentiale  is  the  most
primordial  and  ultimate  positive  way  in  which  Dasein  is  characterized
ontologically. As with existentiality in general, we can, in the first instance,
only  prepare  for  the  problem  of  possibility.  The  phenomenal  basis  for
seeing it at all is provided by the understanding as a disclosive potentiality-
for-Being.
 

vii. Cf. Section 18, H. 85 ff.

H. 144

 

Possibility,  as  an  existentiale,  does  not  signify  a  free-floating
potentiality-for-Being  in  the  sense  of  the  ‘liberty  of  indifference’  (libertas
indifferentiae). In every case Dasein, as essentially having a state-of-mind,
has already got itself into definite possibilities. As the potentiality-for-Being
which is is, it has let such possibilities pass by; it is constantly waiving the
possibilities of its Being, or else it seizes upon them and makes mistakes.(3)
But this means that Dasein is Being-possible which has been delivered over
to itself—thrown  possibility through  and through.  Dasein is  the  possibility
of Being-free for its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.  Its  Being-possible  is
transparent to itself in different possible ways and degrees.
 

1.  ‘…in  der  Bedeutung  von  “einer  Sache  vorstehen  können”,  “ihr  gewachsen  sein”,  “etwas
können”.’  The  expression  ‘vorstehen’  (‘to  manage’,  ‘to  be  in  charge’)  is  here  connected  with
‘verstehen’ (‘to understand’).

2. ‘…von der Kontingenz eines Vorhandenen, sofern mit diesem das und jenes “passieren” kann.’
3. ‘...ergreift sie und vergreift sich.’
Understanding  is  the  Being  of  such  potentiality-for-Being,  which  is
never something still outstanding as not yet present-at-hand, but which, as
something which is essentially never present-at-hand, ‘is’ with the Being of
Dasein,  in  the  sense  of  existence.  Dasein  is  such  that  in  every  case  it  has
understood (or alternatively, not understood) that it is to be thus or thus. As
such  understanding  it  ‘knows’  what  it  is  capable  of—that  is,  what  its
potentiality-for-Being  is  capable  of.(1)  This  ‘knowing’  does  not  first  arise
from an immanent self-perception, but belongs to the Being of the “there”,
which 
in
understanding,  is  its  “there”,  can  it  go  astray  and  fail  to  recognize  itself.
And in so far as understanding is accompanied by state-of-mind and as such

is  essentially  understanding.  And  only  because  Dasein, 

is existentially surrendered to thrownness, Dasein has in every case already
gone astray and failed to recognize itself. In its potentiality-for-Being it is
therefore delivered over to the possibility of first finding itself again in its
possibilities.

Understanding is the existential Being of Dasein’s own potentiality-for-
Being; and it is so in such a way that this Being discloses in itself what its
Being is capable of.(2) We must grasp the structure of this existenliale more
precisely.
 

1. ‘Als solches Verstehen “weiss” es, woran es mit ihm selbst, das heisst seinem Seinkönnen ist.’
2. ‘…so zwar, dass dieses Sein an ihm selbst das Woran des mit ihm selbst Seins erschliesst.’

H. 145

 

As  a disclosure, understanding always pertains  to  the  whole basic state
of  Being-in-the-world.  As  a  potentiality-for-Being,  any  Being-in  is  a
potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world.  Not  only  is  the  world,  qua  world,
disclosed as possible significance, but when that which is within-the-world
is  itself  freed,  this  entity  is  freed  for  its  own  possibilities.  That  which  is
ready-to-hand is discovered as such in its serviceability, its usability, and its
detrimentality.  The  totality  of  involvements  is  revealed  as  the  categorical
whole  of  a  possible  interconnection  of  the  ready-to-hand.  But  even  the
‘unity’ of the manifold present-at-hand, of Nature, can be discovered only if
a possibility of it has been disclosed. Is it accidental that the question about
the Being  of Nature  aims  at  the  ‘conditions of its possibility’? On what is
such an inquiry based? When confronted with this inquiry, we cannot leave
aside the question: why are entities which are not of the character of Dasein
understood  in  their  Being,  if  they  are  disclosed  in  accordance  with  the
conditions  of  their  possibility?  Kant  presupposes  something  of  the  sort,
perhaps  rightly.  But  this  presupposition  itself  is  something  that  cannot  be
left without demonstrating how it is justified.

Why does the understanding—whatever may be the essential dimensions
of  that  which  can  be  disclosed  in  it—always  press  forward  into
possibilities?  It  is  because  the  understanding  has  in  itself  the  existential
structure  which  we  call  “projection”.(1)  With  equal  primordiality  the
understanding  projects  Dasein’s  Being  both  upon  its  “for-the-sake-of-
which”  and  upon  significance,  as  the  worldhood  of  its  current  world.  The

character  of  understanding  as  projection  is  constitutive  for  Being-in-the-
world with regard to the disclosedness of its existentially constitutive state-
of-Being  by  which  the  factical  potentiality-for-Being  gets  its  leeway
[Spielraum]. And as thrown, Dasein is thrown into the kind of Being which
we call “projecting”. Projecting has nothing to do with comporting oneself
towards  a  plan  that  has  been  thought  out,  and  in  accordance  with  which
Dasein  arranges  its  Being.  On  the  contrary,  any  Dasein  has,  as  Dasein,
already projected itself; and as long as it is, it is projecting. As long as it is,
Dasein  always  has  understood  itself  and  always  will  understand  itself  in
terms  of  possibilities.  Furthermore,  the  character  of  understanding  as
projection  is  such  that  the  understanding  does  not  grasp  thematically  that
upon  which  it  projects—that  is  to  say,  possibilities.  Grasping  it  in  such  a
manner  would  take  away  from  what  is  projected  its  very  character  as  a
possibility,  and  would  reduce  it  to  the  given  contents  which  we  have  in
mind;  whereas  projection,  in  throwing,  throws  before  itself  the  possibility
as possibility, and lets it be as such.(2) As projecting, understanding is the
kind of Being of Dasein in which it is its possibilities as possibilities.
 

1.  ‘Entwurf’.  The  basic  meaning  of  this  noun  and  the  cognate  verb  ‘entwerfen’  is  that  of
‘throwing’  something  ‘off’  or  ‘away’  from  one;  but  in  ordinary  German  usage,  and  often  in
Heidegger, they take on the sense of ‘designing’ or ‘sketching’ some ‘project’ which is to be carried
through; and they may also be used in the more special sense of ‘projection’ in which a geometer is
said  to  ‘project’  a  curve  ‘upon’  a  plane.  The  words  ‘projection’  and  ‘project’  accordingly  lend
themselves  rather  well  to  translating  these  words  in  many  contexts,  especially  since  their  root
meanings  are  very  similar  to  those  of  ‘Entwurf’  and  ‘entwerfen’;  but  while  the  root  meaning  of
‘throwing off’ is still very much alive in Heidegger’s German, it has almost entirely died out in the
ordinary English usage of ‘projection’ and ‘project’, which in turn have taken on some connotations
not felt in the German. Thus when in the English translation Dasein is said to ‘project’ entities, or
possibilities, or even its own Being ‘upon’ something, the reader should bear in mind that the root
meaning of ‘throwing’ is more strongly felt in the German than in the translation.

2. ‘…zieht es herab zu einem gegebenen, gemeinten Bestand, während der Entwurf im Werfen
die Möglichkeit als Möglichkeit sich vorwirft und als solche sein lässt.’ The expression ‘einem etwas
vorwerfen’ means literally to ‘throw something forward to someone’, but often has the connotation
of  ‘reproaching  him  with  something’,  or  ‘throwing  something  in  his  teeth’.  Heidegger  may  have
more than one of these significations in mind.

Because of the kind of Being which is constituted by the existentiale of
projection,  Dasein  is  constantly  ‘more’  than  it  factually  is,  supposing  that
one might want to make an inventory of it as something-at-hand and list the
contents of its Being, and supposing that one were able to do so. But Dasein
is  never  more  than  it  factically  is,  for  to  its  facticity  its  potentiality-for-

Being belongs essentially. Yet as Being-possible, moreover, Dasein is never
anything less; that is to say, it is existentially that which, in its potentiality-
for-Being,  it is not  yet. Only  because the  Being  of the  “there” receives  its
the  character  of
Constitution 
understanding  as  projection,  only  because  it  is  what  it  becomes  (or
alternatively, does not become), can it say to itself ‘Become what you are’,
and say this with understanding.

through  understanding  and 

through 

H. 146

 

Projection  always  pertains  to  the  full  disclosedness  of  Being-in-the-
world;  as  potentiality-for-Being,  understanding  has  itself  possibilities,
which  are  sketched  out  beforehand  within  the  range  of  what  is  essentially
disclosable  in  it.  Understanding  can  devote  itself  primarily  to  the
dislosedness of the world; that is, Dasein can, proximally and for the most
part,  understand  itself  in  terms  of  its  world.  Or  else  understanding  throws
itself  primarily  into  the  “for-the-sake-of-which”;  that  is,  Dasein  exists  as
itself.  Understanding  is  either  authentic,  arising  out  of  one’s  own  Self  as
such, or inauthentic. The  ‘in-’ of “inauthentic” does not  mean  that Dasein
cuts  itself  off  from  its  Self  and  understands  ‘only’  the  world.  The  world
belongs  to  Being-one’s-Self  as  Being-in-the-world.  On  the  other  hand,
authentic understanding, no less than that which is inauthentic, can be either
genuine  or  not  genuine.  As  potentiality-for-Being,  understanding  is
into
altogether  permeated  with  possibility.  When  one 
[Sichverlegen in] one of these basic possibilities of understanding, the other
is  not  laid  aside  [legt...  nicht  ab].  Because  understanding,  in  every  case,
pertains  rather  to  Dasein’s  full  disclosedness  as  Being-in-the-world,  this
diversion  of  the  understanding  is  an  existential  modification  of  projection
as  a  whole.  In  understanding  the  world,  Being-in  is  always  understood
along  with  it,  while  understanding  of  existence  as  such  is  always  an
understanding of the world.

is  diverted 

As  factical  Dasein, any Dasein has already diverted  its potentiality-for-

Being into a possibility of understanding.

In  its  projective  character,  understanding  goes  to  make  up  existentially
what we call Dasein’s “sight” [Sicht]. With the disclosedness of the “there”,
this  sight   i  s    existentially  [existenzial  seiende];  and  Dasein  is  this  sight
equiprimordially  in  each  of  those  basic  ways  of  its  Being  which  we  have

already  noted:  as  the  circumspection  [Umsicht]  of  concern,  as  the
considerateness [Rücksicht] of solicitude, and as that sight which is directed
upon Being as such [Sicht auf das Sein als solches], for the sake of which
any Dasein is as it is. The sight which is related primarily and on the whole
to existence we call “transparency” [Durchsichiigkeit]. We choose this term
to designate ‘knowledge of the Self(1) in a sense which is well understood,
so as to indicate that here it is not a matter of perceptually tracking down
and inspecting a point called the “Self”, but rather one of seizing upon the
full  disclosedness  of  Being-in-the-world  throughout  all  the  constitutive
items which are essential to it, and doing so with understanding. In existing,
entities  sight  ‘themselves’  [sichtet  “sich”]  only  in  so  far  as  they  have
become  transparent  to  themselves  with  equal  primordiality  in  those  items
which  are  constitutive  for  their  existence:  their  Being-alongside  the  world
and their Being-with Others.

On  the  other  hand,  Dasein’s  opaqueness  [Undurchsichtigkeit]  is  not
rooted primarily and solely in ‘egocentric’ self-deceptions; it is rooted just
as much in lack of acquaintance with the world.
 

1. ‘ “Selbsterkenntnis” ’. This should be carefully distinguished from the ‘Sichkennen’ discussed
on  H.  124-125.  Perhaps  this  distinction  can  be  expressed—though  rather  crudely—by  pointing  out
that we are here concerned with a full and sophisticated knowledge of the Self in all its implications,
while  in  the  earlier  passage  we  were  concerned  with  the  kind  of  ‘self-knowledge’  which  one  loses
when one ‘forgets oneself’ or does something so out of character that one ‘no longer knows oneself’.

H. 147

 

We must, to be sure, guard against a misunderstanding of the expression
‘sight’. It corresponds to the “clearedness” [Gelichtetheit] which we took as
characterizing the disclosedness of the “there”. ‘Seeing’ does not mean just
perceiving with the bodily eyes, but neither does it mean pure non-sensory
awareness  of  something  present-at-hand  in  its  presence-at-hand.  In  giving
an  existential  signification  to  “sight”,  we  have  merely  drawn  upon  the
peculiar  feature  of  seeing,  that  it  lets  entities  which  are  accessible  to  it  be
encountered  unconcealedly  in  themselves.  Of  course,  every  ‘sense’  does
this within that domain of discovery which is genuinely its own. But from
the  beginning  onwards  the  tradition  of  philosophy  has  been  oriented
primarily towards ‘seeing’ as a way of access to entities and  to  Being.  To
keep  the  connection  with  this  tradition,  we  may  formalize  “sight”  and

“seeing” enough to obtain therewith a universal term for characterizing any
access to entities or to Being, as access in general.

is  understanding  as  common 

By  showing  how  all  sight  is  grounded  primarily  in  understanding  (the
sense
circumspection  of  concern 
[Verständigkeit]),  we  have  deprived  pure  intuition  [Anschauen]  of  its
priority, which corresponds noetically to the priority of the present-at-hand
in  traditional  ontology.  ‘Intuition’  and  ‘thinking’  are  both  derivatives  of
understanding, and already rather remote ones. Even the phenomenological
in  existential
‘intuition  of  essences’  [“Wesensschau”] 
understanding.  We  can  decide  about  this  kind  of  seeing  only  if  we  have
obtained explicit conceptions of Being and of the structure of Being, such
as only phenomena in the phenomenological sense can become.

is  grounded 

The  disclosedness  of  the  “there”  in  understanding  is  itself  a  way  of
Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being. In the  way  in  which  its  Being  is  projected
both  upon  the  “for-the-sake-of-which”  and  upon  significance  (the  world),
there lies the disclosedness of Being in general. Understanding of Being has
already  been  taken  for  granted  in  projecting  upon  possibilities.  In
projection,  Being  is  understood,  though  not  ontologically  conceived.  An
entity whose kind of Being is the essential projection of Being-in-the-world
has understanding of Being, and has this as constitutive for its Being. What
was  posited  dogmatically  at  an  earlier  stage(viii)  now  gets  exhibited  in
terms of the Constitution of the Being in which Dasein as understanding is
its  “there”.  The  existential  meaning  of  this  understanding  of  Being  cannot
be satisfactorily clarified within the limits of this investigation except on the
basis of the Temporal Interpretation of Being.
 

viii. Cf. Section 4, H. 11 ff.

H. 148

 

As  existentialia,  states-of-mind  and  understanding  characterize  the
primordial disclosedness of Being-in-the-world. By way of having a mood,
Dasein  ‘sees’  possibilities,  in  terms  of  which  it  is.  In  the  projective
disclosure  of  such  possibilities,  it  already  has  a  mood  in  every  case.  The
projection of its ownmost potentiality-for-Being has been delivered over to
the Fact of its thrownness into the “there”. Has not Dasein’s Being become
more enigmatical now that we have explicated the existential constitution of

the Being of the “there” in the sense of thrown projection? It has indeed. We
must first let the full enigmatical character of this Being emerge, even if all
we  can  do  is  to  come  to  a  genuine  breakdown  over  its  ‘solution’,  and  to
formulate anew the question about the Being of thrown projective Being-in-
the-world.

But  in  the  first  instance,  even  if  we  are  just  to  bring  into  view  the
everyday  kind  of  Being  in  which  there  is  understanding  with  a  state-of-
mind, and if we are to do so in a way which is phenomenally adequate to
the  full  disclosedness  of  the  “there”,  we  must  work  out  these  existentialia
concretely.(1)
 

1. ‘konkreten’. The earlier editions have ‘konkreteren’ (‘more concretely’).

32. Understanding and Interpretation

 

2. ‘Auslegung’. See our note 3, H. 1 above.

As  understanding,  Dasein  projects  its  Being  upon  possibilities.  This
Being-towards-possibilities  which  understands  is  itself  a  potentiality-for-
Being, and it is so because of the way these possibilities, as disclosed, exert
their  counter-thrust  [Rückschlag]  upon  Dasein.  The  projecting  of  the
understanding  has  its  own  possibility—that  of  developing  itself  [sich
the  understanding  we  call
auszubilden].  This  development  of 
“interpretation”.(3)  In  it  the  understanding  appropriates  understandingly
that  which  is  understood  by  it.  In  interpretation,  understanding  does  not
become  something  different.  It  becomes  itself.  Such  interpretation  is
grounded  existentially  in  understanding;  the  latter  does  not  arise  from  the
former.  Nor  is  interpretation  the  acquiring  of  information  about  what  is
understood;  it  is  rather  the  working-out  of  possibilities  projected  in
understanding. In accordance with the trend of these preparatory analyses of
everyday  Dasein,  we  shall  pursue  the  phenomenon  of  interpretation  in
understanding the world—that is, in inauthentic understanding, and indeed
in the mode of its genuineness.
 

3. ‘Auslegung’. The older editions have ‘A u s l e g u n g’.

H. 149

 

In  terms  of  the  significance  which  is  disclosed  in  understanding  the
world,  concernful  Being-alongside  the  ready-to-hand  gives  itself  to
understand whatever involvement that which is encountered can have.(1) To
say  that  “circumspection  discovers”  means  that  the  ‘world’  which  has
already been understood comes to be interpreted. The ready-to-hand comes
explicitly into the sight which understands. All preparing, putting to rights,
repairing, improving, rounding-out, are accomplished in the following way:
we take apart(2) in its “in-order-to” that which is circumspectively ready-to-
hand,  and  we  concern  ourselves  with  it  in  accordance  with  what  becomes
visible  through  this  process.  That  which  has  been  circumspectively  taken
apart with regard to its “in-order-to”, and taken apart as such—that which is
explicitly  understood—has  the  structure  of  something  as  something.  The
circumspective  question  as  to  what  this  particular  thing  that  is  ready-to-
hand may be, receives the circumspectively interpretative answer that it is
for  such  and  such  a  purpose  [es  ist  zum...].  If  we  tell  what  it  is  for  [des
Wozu],  we  are  not  simply  designating  something;  but  that  which  is
designated  is  understood  as  that  as  which  we  are  to  take  the  thing  in
question.  That  which  is  disclosed  in  understanding—that  which  is
understood—is already accessible in such a way that its ‘as which’ can be
made  to  stand  out  explicitly.  The  ‘as’  makes  up  the  structure  of  the
explicitness  of  something 
the
interpretation.  In  dealing  with  what  is  environmentally  ready-to-hand  by
interpreting it circumspectively, we ‘see’ it as a table, a door, a carriage, or
a  bridge;  but  what  we  have  thus  interpreted  [Ausgelegte]  need  not
necessarily  be  also  taken  apart  [auseinander  zu  legen]  by  making  an
assertion which definitely characterizes it. Any mere pre-predicative seeing
of the ready-to-hand is, in itself, something which already understands and
interprets. But does not the absence of such an ‘as’ make up the mereness of
any pure perception of something? Whenever we see with this kind of sight,
we  already  do  so  understandingly  and  interpretatively.  In  the  mere
encountering  of  something,  it  is  understood  in  terms  of  a  totality  of
involvements;  and  such  seeing  hides  in  itself  the  explicitness  of  the
assignment-relations (of the “in-order-to”) which belong to that totality.
 

is  understood. 

It  constitutes 

that 

1. ‘…gibt sich... zu verstehen, welche Bewandtnis es je mit dem Begegnenden haben kann.’
2. ‘auseinandergelegt’. Heidegger is contrasting the verb ‘auslegen’ (literally, ‘lay out’) with the

cognate ‘auseinanderlegen’ (‘lay asunder’ or ‘take apart’).

That  which  is  understood  gets  Articulated  when  the  entity  to  be
understood  is  brought  close  interpretatively  by  taking  as  our  clue  the
‘something  as  something’;  and  this  Articulation  lies  before  [liegt vor]  our
making  any  thematic  assertion  about  it.  In  such  an  assertion  the  ‘as’  does
not turn up for the first time; it just gets expressed for the first time, and this
is  possible  only  in  that  it  lies  before  us  as  something  expressible.(1)  The
fact  that  when  we  look  at  something,  the  explicitness  of  assertion  can  be
absent,  does  not  justify  our  denying  that  there  is  any  Articulative
interpretation in such mere seeing, and hence that there is any as-structure
in  it.  When  we  have  to  do  with  anything,  the  mere  seeing  of  the  Things
which are closest to us bears in itself the structure of interpretation, and in
so primordial a manner that just to grasp something free, as it were, of  the
“as”, requires a certain readjustment. When we merely stare at something,
our just-having-it-before-us lies before us as a failure to understand it any
more. This grasping which is free of the “as”, is a privation of the kind of
seeing in which one merely understands. It is not more primordial than that
kind  of  seeing,  but  is  derived  from  it.  If  the  ‘as’  is  ontically  unexpressed,
this  must  not  seduce  us  into  overlooking  it  as  a  constitutive  state  for
understanding, existential and a priori.
 

1. ‘…was allein so möglich ist, dass es als Aussprechbares vor-liegt.’ Here we follow the reading
of the earlier editions. The hyphen in ‘vor-liegt’ comes at the end of the line in the later editions, but
is undoubtedly meant to suggest (like the italicization of the ‘vor’ in the previous sentence) that this
verb is to be interpreted with unusual literalness.

This paragraph is noteworthy for an exploitation of the prefix ‘aus’ (‘out’), which fails to show
up  in  our  translation.  Literally  an  ‘Aussage’  (‘assertion’)  is  something  which  is  ‘said  out’;  an
‘Auslegung’ (‘interpretation’) is a ‘laying-out’; that which is ‘ausdrücklich’ (‘explicit’) is something
that has been ‘pressed out’; that which is ‘aussprechbar’ (our ‘expressible’) is something that can be
‘spoken out’.

The verbs ‘ausdrücken’ and ‘aussprechen’ are roughly synonymous; but ‘aussprechen’ often has
the  more  specific  connotations  of  ‘pronunciation’,  ‘pronouncing  oneself’,  ‘speaking  one’s  mind’,
‘finishing what one has to say’, etc. While it would be possible to reserve ‘express’ for ‘ausdrücken’
and translate ‘aussprechen’ by some such phrase as ‘speak out’, it is more convenient to use ‘express’
for both verbs, especially since ‘aussprechen’ and its derivatives have occurred very seldom before
the  present  chapter,  in  which  ‘ausdrücken’  rarely  appears.  On  the  other  hand,  we  can  easily
distinguish between the more frequent ‘ausdrücklich’ and ‘ausgesprochen’ by translating the latter as
‘expressed’ or ‘expressly’, and reserving ‘explicit’ for both ‘ausdrücklich’ and ‘explizit’.

H. 150

 

interpreting 

if  such  perception 

But if we never perceive equipment that is ready-to-hand without already
understanding  and 
lets  us
it,  and 
circumspectively  encounter  something  as  something,  does  this  not  mean
that in the first instance we have experienced something purely present-at-
hand,  and  then  taken  it  as  a  door,  as  a  house?  This  would  be  a
misunderstanding  of  the  specific  way  in  which  interpretation  functions  as
disclosure.  In  interpreting,  we  do  not,  so  to  speak,  throw  a  ‘signification’
over some naked thing which is present-at-hand, we do not stick a value on
it; but when something within-the-world is encountered as such, the thing in
question  already  has  an 
in  our
understanding of the world, and this involvement is one which gets laid out
by the interpretation.(1)

involvement  which 

is  disclosed 

The  ready-to-hand  is  always  understood  in  terms  of  a  totality  of
involvements.  This  totality  need  not  be  grasped  explicitly  by  a  thematic
interpretation.  Even  if  it  has  undergone  such  an  interpretation,  it  recedes
into an understanding which does not stand out from the background. And
this  is  the  very  mode  in  which  it  is  the  essential  foundation  for  everyday
circumspective interpretation. In every case this interpretation is grounded
in something we have in advance—in a fore-having.(2) As the appropriation
of understanding, the interpretation operates in Being towards a totality of
involvements  which  is  already  understood—a  Being  which  understands.
When something is understood but is still veiled, it becomes unveiled by an
act of appropriation, and this is always done under the guidance of a point
of view, which fixes that with regard to which what is understood is to be
interpreted. In every case interpretation is grounded in something we see in
advance—in a fore-sight. This fore-sight ‘takes the first cut’ out of what has
been taken into our fore-having, and it does so with a view to a definite way
in  which  this  can  be  interpreted.(3)  Anything  understood  which  is  held  in
our  fore-having  and  towards  which  we  set  our  sights  ‘foresightedly’,
In  such  an
becomes  conceptualizable 
interpretation,  the  way  in  which  the  entity  we  are  interpreting  is  to  be
conceived can be drawn from the entity itself or the interpretation can force
the  entity  into  concepts  to  which  it  is  opposed  in  its  manner  of  Being.  In
either  case,  the  interpretation  has  already  decided  for  a  definite  way  of
conceiving  it,  either  with  finality  or  with  reservations;  it  is  grounded  in
something we grasp in advance—in a fore-conception.
 

interpretation. 

through 

the 

1. ‘…die durch die Auslegung herausgelegt wird.’
2.  In  this  paragraph  Heidegger  introduces  the  important  words  ‘Vorhabe’,  ‘Vorsicht’,  and
‘Vorgriff’.  ‘Vorhabe’  is  perhaps  best  translated  by  some  such  expression  as  ‘what  we  have  in
advance’  or  ‘what  we  have  before  us’;  but  we  shall  usually  find  it  more  convenient  to  adopt  the
shorter  term  ‘fore-having’,  occasionally  resorting  to  hendiadys,  as  in  the  present  sentence,  and  we
shall handle the other terms in the same manner. ‘Vorsicht’ (‘what we see in advance’ or ‘fore-sight’)
is  the  only  one  of  these  expressions  which  occurs  in  ordinary  German  usage,  and  often  has  the
connotation  of  ‘caution’  or  ‘prudence’;  Heidegger,  however,  uses  it  in  a  more  general  sense
somewhat  more  akin  to  the  English  ‘foresight’,  without  the  connotation  of  a  shrewd  and  accurate
prediction.  ‘Vorgriff’  (‘what  we  grasp  in  advance’  or  ‘fore-conception’)  is  related  to  the  verb
‘vorgreifen’ (‘to anticipate’) as well as to the noun “Begriff”.

3.  ‘Die  Auslegung  gründet  jeweils  in  einer  Vorsicht,  die  das  in  Vorhabe  Genommene  auf  eine
bestimmte Auslegbarkeit hin “anschneidet”.’ The idea seems to be that just as the person who cuts
off the first slice of a loaf of bread gets the loaf ‘started’, the fore-sight ‘makes a start’ on what we
have in advance—the fore-having.

Whenever something is interpreted as something, the interpretation will
be  founded  essentially  upon  fore-having,  fore-sight,  and  fore-conception.
An interpretation is never a presuppositionless apprehending of something
presented to us.(1) If, when one is engaged in a particular concrete kind of
interpretation,  in  the  sense  of  exact  textual  Interpretation,  one  likes  to
appeal  [beruft]  to  what  ‘stands  there’,  then  one  finds  that  what  ‘stands
there’  in  the  first  instance  is  nothing  other  than  the  obvious  undiscussed
assumption  [Vormeinung]  of  the  person  who  does  the  interpreting.  In  an
interpretative  approach  there  lies  such  an  assumption,  as  that  which  has
been ‘taken for granted’ [“gesetzt”] with the interpretation as such—that is
to say, as that which has been presented in our fore-having, our fore-sight,
and our fore-conception.
 

1. ‘…eines Vorgegebenen.’ Here, as in many other passages, we have translated ‘vorgeben’ by
various  forms  of  the  verb  ‘to  present’;  but  it  would  perhaps  be  more  in  line  with  Heidegger’s
discussion of the prefix ‘vor-’ to write ‘...of something fore-given’.

H. 151

 

How are we to conceive the character of this ‘fore’? Have we done so if
we say formally that this is something ‘a priori’? Why does understanding,
which  we  have  designated  as  a  fundamental  exisientiale  of  Dasein,  have
this  structure  as  its  own?  Anything  interpreted,  as  something  interpreted,
has  the  ‘as’-structure  as  its  own;  and  how  is  this  related  to  the  ‘fore’
structure?  The  phenomenon  of  the  ‘as’-structure  is  manifestly  not  to  be
dissolved or broken up ‘into pieces’. But is a primordial analytic for it thus

ruled  out?  Are  we  to  concede  that  such  phenomena  are  ‘ultimates’?  Then
there  would  still  remain  the  question,  “why?”  Or  do  the  fore-structure  of
understanding  and  the  as-structure  of  interpretation  show  an  existential-
ontological  connection  with  the  phenomenon of projection?  And does this
phenomenon point back to a primordial state of Dasein’s Being?

Before we answer these questions, for which the preparation up till now
has been far from sufficient, we must investigate whether what has become
visible  as  the  fore-structure  of  understanding  and  the  as-structure  of
interpretation, does not itself already present us with a unitary phenomenon
—one of which copious use is made in philosophical problematics, though
what  is  used  so  universally  falls  short  of  the  primordiality  of  ontological
explication.

In  the  projecting  of  the  understanding,  entities  are  disclosed  in  their
possibility. The character of the possibility corresponds, on each occasion,
with  the  kind  of  Being  of  the  entity  which  is  understood.  Entities  within-
the-world generally are projected upon the world—that is, upon a whole of
significance,  to  whose  reference-relations  concern,  as  Being-in-the-world,
has been tied up in advance. When entities within-the-world are discovered
along  with  the  Being  of  Dasein—that  is,  when  they  have  come  to  be
understood—we  say  that  they  have  meaning  [Sinn].  But  that  which  is
understood, taken strictly, is not the meaning but the entity, or alternatively,
Being.  Meaning  is  that  wherein  the  intelligibility  [Verständlichkeit]  of
something maintains itself. That which can be Articulated in a disclosure by
which  we  understand,  we  call  “meaning”.  The  concept  of  meaning
embraces  the  formal  existential  framework  of  what  necessarily  belongs  to
that  which  an  understanding  interpretation  Articulates.  Meaning  is  the
“upon-which”  of  a  projection  in  terms  of  which  something  becomes
intelligible  as  something;  it  gets  its  structure  from  a  fore-having,  a  fore-
sight,  and  a 
fore-conception.(1)  In  so  far  as  understanding  and
interpretation  make  up  the  existential  state  of  Being  of  the  “there”,
“meaning”  must  be  conceived  as  the  formal-existential  framework  of  the
disclosedness which belongs to understanding. Meaning is an existentiale of
Dasein, not a property attaching to entities, lying ‘behind’ them, or floating
somewhere as an ‘intermediate domain’. Dasein only ‘has’ meaning, so far
as the disclosedness of Being-in-the-world can be ‘filled in’ by the entities
discoverable in that disclosedness.(2) Hence only Dasein can be meaningful
[sinnvoll] or meaningless [sinnlos]. That  is  to  say,  its  own  Being  and  the

entities  disclosed  with  its  Being  can  be  appropriated  in  understanding,  or
can remain relegated to non-understanding.
 

1.  ‘Sinn  ist  des  durch  Vorhabe,  Vorsicht  und  Vorgiff  strukturierte  Woraufhin  des  Entwurfs,  aus
dem her etwas als etwas verständlich wird.’ (Notice that our usual translation of ‘verständlich, and
‘Verständlichkeit’ as ‘intelligible’ and ‘intelligibility’, fails to show the connection of the words with
‘Verständnis’,  etc.  This  connection  could  have  been  brought  out  effectively  by  writing
‘understandable,’ ‘understandability’, etc., but only at the cost of awkwardness.)

2. ‘Sinn “hat” nur das Dasein, sofern die Erschlossenheit des In-der-Welt-seins durch das in ihr
entdeckbare Seiende “erfüllbar” ist.’ The point of this puzzling and ambiguous sentence may become
somewhat clearer if the reader recalls that here as elsewhere (see H. 75 above) the verb ‘erschliessen’
(‘disclose’) is used in the sense of ‘opening something up’ so that its contents can be ‘discovered’.
What thus gets ‘opened up’ will then be ‘filled in’ as more and more of its contents get discovered.

H. 152

 

This  Interpretation  of  the  concept  of  ‘meaning’  is  one  which  is
ontologico-existential in principle; if we adhere to it, then all entities whose
kind  of  Being  is  of  a  character  other  than  Dasein’s  must  be  conceived  as
unmeaning  [unsinniges],  essentially  devoid  of  any  meaning  at  all.  Here
‘unmeaning’ does not signify that we are saying anything about the value of
such  entities,  but  it  gives  expression  to  an  ontological  characteristic.  And
only that which is unmeaning can be absurd [widersinnig]. The present-at-
hand,  as  Dasein  encounters  it,  can,  as  it  were,  assault  Dasein’s  Being;
natural events, for instance, can break in upon us and destroy us.

And  if  we  are  inquiring  about  the  meaning  of  Being,  our  investigation
does not then become a “deep” one [tiefsinnig], nor does it puzzle out what
stands behind Being. It asks about Being itself in so far as Being enters into
the intelligibility of Dasein. The meaning of Being can never be contrasted
with entities, or with Being as the ‘ground’ which gives entities support; for
a ‘ground’ becomes accessible only as meaning, even if it is itself the abyss
of meaninglessness.(1)
 

1. ‘Der Sinn von Sein kann nie in Gegensatz gebracht werden zum Seienden oder zum Sein als
tragenden “Grund” des Seienden, weil “Grund” nur als Sinn zugänglich wird, und sei er selbst der
Abgrund  der  Sinnlosigkeit.’  Notice  the  etymological  kinship  between  ‘Grund’  (‘ground’)  and
‘Abgrund’ (‘abyss’).

 

As the disclosedness of the “there”, understanding always pertains to the
whole  of  Being-in-the-world.  In  every  understanding  of  the  world,

existence is understood with it, and vice versa. All interpretation, moreover,
operates  in  the  fore-structure,  which  we  have  already  characterized.  Any
interpretation  which  is  to  contribute  understanding,  must  already  have
understood  what  is  to  be  interpreted.  This  is  a  fact  that  has  always  been
remarked, even if only in the area of derivative ways of understanding and
interpretation, such as philological Interpretation. The latter belongs within
the range of scientific knowledge. Such knowledge demands the rigour of a
demonstration  to  provide  grounds  for  it.  In  a  scientific  proof,  we  may  not
presuppose what it is our task to provide grounds for. But if interpretation
must in any case already operate in that which is understood, and if it must
draw  its  nurture  from  this,  how  is  it  to  bring  any  scientific  results  to
maturity  without  moving  in  a  circle,  especially  if,  moreover,  the
understanding  which  is  presupposed  still  operates  within  our  common
information about man and the world? Yet according to the most elementary
rules  of  logic,  this  circle is  a circulus vitiosus.  If  that  be  so,  however,  the
business  of  historiological  interpretation  is  excluded  a  priori  from  the
domain  of  rigorous  knowledge.  In  so  far  as  the  Fact  of  this  circle  in
understanding is not eliminated, historiology must then be resigned to less
rigorous possibilities of knowing. Historiology is permitted to compensate
for  this  defect  to  some  extent  through  the  ‘spiritual  signification’  of  its
‘objects’.  But  even  in  the  opinion  of  the  historian  himself,  it  would
admittedly  be  more  ideal  if  the  circle  could  be  avoided  and  if  there
remained the hope of creating some time a historiology which would be as
independent of the standpoint of the observer as our knowledge of Nature is
supposed to be.

H. 153

 

But  if  we  see  this  circle  as  a  vicious  one  and  look  out  for  ways  of
avoiding it, even if we just ‘sense’ it as an inevitable imperfection, then the
act  of  understanding  has  been  misunderstood  from  the  ground  up.  The
assimilation  of  understanding  and  interpretation  to  a  definite  ideal  of
knowledge is not the issue here. Such an ideal is itself only a subspecies of
understanding—a  subspecies  which  has  strayed  into  the  legitimate  task  of
unintelligibility
in 
grasping 
[Unverständlichkeit].  If  the  basic  conditions  which  make  interpretation
possible  are  to  be  fulfilled,  this  must  rather  be  done  by  not  failing  to

present-at-hand 

essential 

the 

its 

recognize  beforehand  the  essential  conditions  under  which  it  can  be
performed. What is decisive is not to get out of the circle but to come into it
in the right way. This circle of understanding is not an orbit in which any
random kind of knowledge may move; it is the expression of the existential
fore-structure  of  Dasein  itself.  It  is  not  to  be  reduced  to  the  level  of  a
vicious circle, or even of a circle which is merely tolerated. In the circle is
hidden a positive possibility of the most primordial kind of knowing. To be
sure,  we  genuinely  take  hold  of  this  possibility  only  when,  in  our
interpretation,  we  have  understood  that  our  first,  last,  and  constant  task  is
never  to  allow  our  fore-having,  fore-sight,  and  fore-conception  to  be
presented to us by fancies and popular conceptions, but rather to make the
scientific theme secure by working out these fore-structures in terms of the
things themselves. Because understanding, in accordance with its existential
meaning, 
the  ontological
presuppositions of historiological knowledge transcend in principle the idea
of rigour held in the most exact sciences. Mathematics is not more rigorous
than  historiology,  but  only  narrower,  because  the  existential  foundations
relevant for it lie within a narrower range.

is  Dasein’s  own  potentiality-for-Being, 

The  ‘circle’  in  understanding  belongs  to  the  structure  of  meaning,  and
the latter phenomenon is rooted in the existential constitution of Dasein—
that is, in the understanding which interprets. An entity for which, as Being-
in-the-world,  its  Being  is  itself  an  issue,  has,  ontologically,  a  circular
structure. If, however, we note that ‘circularity’ belongs ontologically to a
kind of Being which is present-at-hand (namely, to subsistence [Bestand]),
we  must  altogether  avoid  using  this  phenomenon  to  characterize  anything
like Dasein ontologically.

33. Assertion as a Derivative Mode of Interpretation

 

 

H. 154

All  interpretation  is  grounded  on  understanding.  That  which  has  been
articulated(1)  as  such  in  interpretation  and  sketched  out  beforehand  in  the
understanding in general as something articulable, is the meaning. In so far
as assertion (‘judgment’)(2)  is  grounded on  understanding and presents us
with a derivative form in which an interpretation has been carried out, it too

‘has’  a  meaning.  Yet  this  meaning  cannot  be  defined  as  something  which
occurs ‘in’ [“an”] a judgment along with the judging itself. In our present
context, we shall give an explicit analysis of assertion, and this analysis will
serve several purposes.
 

1. ‘Gegliederte’. The verbs ‘artikulieren’ and ‘gliedern’ can both be translated by ‘articulate’ in
English; even in German they are nearly synonymous, but in the former the emphasis is presumably
on the ‘joints’ at which something gets divided, while in the latter the emphasis is presumably on the
‘parts’  or  ‘members’.  We  have  distinguished  between  them  by  translating  ‘artikulieren’  by
‘Articulate’ (with a capital ‘A’), and ‘gliedern’ by ‘articulate’ (with a lower-case initial).

2. ‘…die Aussage (das “Urteil”)…’

For one thing, it can be demonstrated, by considering assertion, in what
ways  the  structure  of  the  ‘as’,  which  is  constitutive  for  understanding  and
interpretation,  can  be  modified.  When 
this  has  been  done,  both
understanding  and  interpretation  will  be  brought  more  sharply  into  view.
For  another  thing,  the  analysis  of  assertion  has  a  special  position  in  the
problematic of fundamental ontology, because in the decisive period when
ancient  ontology  was  beginning,  the λόγος  functioned  as  the  only  clue  for
obtaining access to that which authentically  i s  [zum eigentlich Seienden],
and  for  defining  the  Being  of  such  entities.  Finally  assertion  has  been
accepted  from  ancient  times  as  the  primary  and  authentic  ‘locus’  of  truth.
The  phenomenon  of  truth  is  so  thoroughly  coupled  with  the  problem  of
Being that our investigation, as it proceeds further, will necessarily come up
against  the  problem  of  truth;  and  it already  lies  within  the  dimensions  of
that  problem,  though  not  explicitly.  The  analysis  of  assertion  will  at  the
same time prepare the way for this latter problematic.

In  what  follows,  we  give  three  significations  to  the  term  “assertion”.
These  are  drawn  from  the  phenomenon  which  is  thus  designated,  they  are
connected  among  themselves,  and  in  their  unity  they  encompass  the  full
structure of assertion.

1. The primary signification of “assertion” is “pointing out” [Aufzeigen].
In this we adhere to the primordial meaning of λόγος as ἀπόφανσις—letting
an  entity  be  seen  from  itself.  In  the  assertion  ‘The  hammer  is  too  heavy’,
what is discovered for sight is not a ‘meaning’, but an entity in the way that
it is ready-to-hand. Even if this entity is not close enough to be grasped and
‘seen’,  the  pointing-out  has  in  view  the  entity  itself  and  not,  let  us  say,  a
mere  “representation”  [Vorstellung]  of  it—neither  something  ‘merely

represented’ nor the psychical condition in which the person who makes the
assertion “represents” it.

H. 155

 

2.  “Assertion”  means  no  less  than  “predication”.  We  ‘assert’  a
‘predicate’  of  a  ‘subject’,  and  the  ‘subject’  is  given  a  definite  character
[bestimmt] by the ‘predicate’. In this signification of “assertion”, that which
is  put  forward  in  the  assertion  [Das  Ausgesagte]  is  not  the  predicate,  but
‘the hammer itself’. On the other hand, that which does the asserting [Das
Aussagende]  (in  other  words,  that  which  gives  something  a  definite
character) lies in the ‘too heavy’. That which is put forward in the assertion
in  the  second  signification  of  “assertion”  (that  which  is  given  a  definite
character, as such) has undergone a narrowing of content as compared with
what  is  put  forward  in  the  assertion  in  the  first  signification  of  this  term.
Every  predication  is  what  it  is,  only  as  a  pointing-out.  The  second
signification  of  “assertion”  has  its  foundation  in  the  first.  Within  this
pointing-out, the elements which are Articulated in predication—the subject
and predicate—arise. It is not by giving something a definite character that
we first discover that which shows itself—the hammer—as such; but when
we  give  it  such  a  character,  our  seeing  gets  restricted  to  it  in  the  first
instance,  so  that  by  this  explicit  restriction(1)  of  our  view,  that  which  is
already manifest may be made explicitly manifest in its definite character. In
giving something a definite character, we must, in the first instance, take a
step  back  when  confronted  with  that  which  is  already  manifest—the
hammer  that  is  too  heavy.  In  ‘setting  down  the  subject’,  we  dim  entities
down to focus in ‘that hammer there’, so that by thus dimming them down
we may let that which is manifest be seen in its own definite character as a
character that can be determined.(2) Setting down the subject, setting down
thoroughly
the  predicate,  and  setting  down 
‘apophantical’ in the strict sense of the word.

together,  are 

two 

the 

3.  “Assertion”  means  “communication”  [Mitteilung],  speaking  forth
[Heraussage]. As communication, it is directly related to “assertion” in the
first  and  second  significations.  It  is  letting  someone  see  with  us  what  we
have pointed out by way of giving it a definite character. Letting someone
see  with  us  shares  with  [teilt...  mit]  the  Other  that  entity  which  has  been
pointed  out  in  its  definite  character.  That  which  is  ‘shared’  is  our  Being

towards what has been pointed out—a Being in which we see it in common.
One must keep in mind that this Being-towards is Being-in-the-world, and
that from out of this very world what has been pointed out gets encountered.
Any  assertion,  as  a  communication  understood  in  this  existential  manner,
must have been expressed.(3) As something communicated, that which has
been put forward in the assertion is something that Others can ‘share’ with
the  person  making  the  assertion,  even  though  the  entity  which  he  has
pointed  out  and  to  which  he  has  given  a  definite  character  is  not  close
enough  for  them  to  grasp  and  see  it.  That  which  is  put  forward  in  the
assertion  is  something  which  can  be  passed  along  in  ‘further  retelling’.
There is a widening of the range of that mutual sharing which sees. But at
the same time, what has been pointed out may become veiled again in this
further  retelling,  although  even  the  kind  of  knowing  which  arises  in  such
hearsay (whether knowledge that something is the case [Wissen] or merely
an  acquaintance  with  something  [Kennen])  always  has  the  entity  itself  in
view  and  does  not  ‘give  assent’  to  some  ‘valid  meaning’  which  has  been
passed around. Even hearsay is a Being-in-the-world, and a Being towards
what is heard.
 

1. ‘Einschränkung’. The older editions have ‘E n t s c h r ä n k u n g’.
2. ‘…die “Subjektsetzung” blendet das Seiende ab auf “der Hammer da”, um durch den Vollzug

der Entblendung das Offenbare in seiner bestimmbaren Bestimmtheit sehen zu lassen.’

3. ‘Zur Aussage als der so existenzial verstandenen Mit-teilung gehört die Ausgesprochenheit.’

H. 156

 

There is prevalent today a theory of ‘judgment’ which is oriented to the
phenomenon of ‘validity’.(1) We shall not give an extensive discussion of it
here. It will be sufficient to allude to the very questionable character of this
phenomenon of ‘validity’, though since the time of Lotze people have been
fond of passing this off as a ‘primal phenomenon’ which cannot be traced
back  any  further.  The  fact  that  it  can  play  this  role  is  due  only  to  its
ontologically unclarified character. The ‘problematic’ which has established
itself round this idolized word is no less opaque. In the first place, validity
is  viewed  as  the  ‘form’  of  actuality  which  goes  with  the  content  of  the
judgment,  in  so  far  as  that  content  remains  unchanged  as  opposed  to  the
changeable ‘psychical’ process of judgment. Considering how the status of
the question of Being in general has been characterized in the introduction

to this treatise, we would scarcely venture to expect that ‘validity’ as ‘ideal
Being’  is  distinguished  by  special  ontological  clarity.  In the  second  place,
“validity”  means  at  the  same  time  the  validity  of  the  meaning  of  the
judgment, which is valid of the ‘Object’ it has in view; and thus it attains
the  signification  of  an  ‘Objectively  valid  character’ and  of  Objectivity  in
general.  In  the  third  place,  the  meaning  which  is  thus  ‘valid’  of an  entity,
and which is valid ‘timelessly’ in itself, is said to be ‘valid’ also in the sense
of being valid for everyone who judges rationally. “Validity” now means a
bindingness,  or  ‘universally  valid’  character.(2)  Even  if  one  were  to
advocate a ‘critical’ epistemological theory, according to which the subject
does not ‘really’ ‘come out’ to the Object, then this valid character, as the
validity of an Object (Objectivity), is grounded upon that stock of true (!)
meaning  which  is  itself  valid.  The  three  significations  of  ‘being  valid’
which  we  have  set  forth—the  way  of  Being  of  the  ideal,  Objectivity,  and
bindingness—not  only  are  opaque  in  themselves  but  constantly  get
confused with one another. Methodological fore-sight demands that we do
not choose such unstable concepts as a clue to Interpretation. We make no
advance restriction upon the concept of “meaning” which would confine it
to  signifying  the  ‘content  of  judgment’,  but  we  understand  it  as  the
existential  phenomenon  already  characterized,  in  which  the  formal
framework  of  what  can  be  disclosed  in  understanding  and  Articulated  in
interpretation becomes visible.
 

1.  Heidegger  uses  three  words  which  might  conveniently  be  translated  as  ‘validity’:  ‘Geltung’
(our ‘validity’), ‘Gültigkeit’ (our ‘valid character’), and ‘Gelten’ (our ‘being valid’, etc.). The reader
who  has  studied  logic  in  English  and  who  accordingly  thinks  of  ‘validity’  as  merely  a  property  of
arguments  in  which  the  premisses  imply  the  conclusion,  must  remember  that  in  German  the  verb
‘gelten’  and  its  derivatives  are  used  much  more  broadly,  so  as  to  apply  to  almost  anything  that  is
commonly  (or  even  privately)  accepted,  so  that  one  can  speak  of  the  ‘validity’  of  legal  tender,  the
‘validity’ of a ticket for so many weeks or months, the ‘validity’ of that which ‘holds’ for me or for
you, the ‘validity’ of anything that is the case. While Heidegger’s discussion does not cover as many
of these meanings as will be listed in any good German dictionary, he goes well beyond the narrower
usage of the English-speaking logician. Of course, we shall often translate ‘gelten’ in other ways.

2. ‘...Verbindlichkeit, “Allgemeingültigkeit”.’

H. 157

 

If we bring together the three significations of ‘assertion’ which we have
analysed,  and  get  a  unitary  view  of  the  full  phenomenon,  then  we  may
define  “assertion”  as  “a  pointing-out  which  gives  something  a  definite

character  and  which  communicates”.  It  remains  to  ask  with  what
justification we have taken assertion as a mode of interpretation at all. If it
is something of this sort, then the essential structures of interpretation must
recur in it. The pointing-out which assertion does is performed on the basis
of  what  has  already  been  disclosed  in  understanding  or  discovered
circumspectively. Assertion is not a free-floating kind of behaviour which,
in  its  own  right,  might  be  capable  of  disclosing  entities  in  general  in  a
primary  way:  on  the  contrary  it  always  maintains  itself  on  the  basis  of
Being-in-the-world. What we have shown earlier(ix) in relation to knowing
the  world,  holds  just  as  well  as  assertion.  Any  assertion  requires  a  fore-
having of whatever has been disclosed; and this is what it points out by way
of  giving  something  a  definite  character.  Furthermore,  in  any  approach
when one gives something a definite character, one is already taking a look
directionally  at  what is  to  be put  forward in  the  assertion. When an entity
which  has  been  presented  is  given  a  definite  character,  the  function  of
giving it such a character is taken over by that with regard to which we set
our sights towards the entity.(1) Thus any assertion requires a fore-sight; in
this  the  predicate  which  we  are  to  assign  [zuzuweisende]  and  make  stand
out, gets loosened, so to speak, from its unexpressed inclusion in the entity
itself.  To  any  assertion  as  a  communication  which  gives  something  a
definite  character  there  belongs,  moreover,  an  Articulation  of  what  is
pointed out, and this Articulation is in accordance with significations. Such
an assertion will operate with a definite way of conceiving: “The hammer is
heavy”, “Heaviness belongs to the hammer”, “The hammer has the property
of heaviness”. When an assertion is made, some fore-conception is always
implied;  but  it  remains  for  the  most  part  inconspicuous,  because  the
language  already  hides  in  itself  a  developed  way  of  conceiving.  Like  any
interpretation whatever, assertion necessarily has a fore-having, a fore-sight,
and a fore-conception as its existential foundations.
 

ix. Cf. Section 13, H. 59 ff.

 

die Funktion des Bestimmenden.’

1. ‘Woraufhin das vorgegebene Seiende anvisiert wird, das übernimmt im Bestimmungsvollzug

But  to  what  extent  does  it  become  a derivative mode  of  interpretation?
What has been modified in it? We can point out the modification if we stick
to certain limiting cases of assertion which function in logic as normal cases

and  as  examples  of  the  ‘simplest’  assertion-phenomena.  Prior  to  all
analysis,  logic  has  already  understood  ‘logically’  what  it  takes  as  a  theme
under  the  heading  of  the  “categorical  statement”—for  instance,  ‘The
hammer is heavy’. The unexplained presupposition is that the ‘meaning’ of
this sentence is to be taken as: “This Thing—a hammer—has the property
of heaviness”. In concernful circumspection there are no such assertions ‘at
first’.  But  such  circumspection  has  of  course  its  specific  ways  of
interpreting,  and  these,  as  compared  with  the  ‘theoretical  judgment’  just
mentioned,  may  take  some  such  form  as  ‘The  hammer  is  too  heavy’,  or
rather  just  ‘Too  heavy!’,  ‘Hand  me  the  other  hammer!’  Interpretation  is
carried  out  primordially  not  in  a  theoretical  statement  but  in  an  action  of
circumspective concern—laying aside the unsuitable tool, or exchanging it,
‘without wasting words’. From the fact that words are absent, it may not be
concluded  that  interpretation  is  absent.  On  the  other  hand,  the  kind  of
interpretation  which  is  circumspectively  expressed  is  not  necessarily
already  an  assertion  in  the  sense  we  have  defined.  By  what  existential-
ontological  modifications  does  assertion  arise 
from  circumspective
interpretation?

H. 158

 

The entity which is held in our fore-having—for instance, the hammer—
is  proximally  ready-to-hand  as  equipment.  If  this  entity  becomes  the
‘object’  of  an  assertion,  then  as  soon  as  we  begin  this  assertion,  there  is
already  a  change-over  in  the  fore-having.  Something  ready-to-hand  with
which  we  have  to  do  or  perform  something,  turns  into  something  ‘about
which’ the  assertion  that  points  it  out  is  made.  Our  fore-sight  is  aimed  at
something  present-at-hand  in  what  is  ready-to-hand.  Both  by  and  for  this
way of looking at it [Hin-sicht], the ready-to-hand becomes veiled as ready-
to-hand. Within this discovering of presence-at-hand, which is at the same
time  a  covering-up  of  readiness-to-hand,  something  present-at-hand  which
we  encounter  is  given  a  definite  character  in  its  Being-present-at-hand-in-
such-and-such-a-manner.  Only  now  are  we  given  any  access  to  properties
or the like. When an assertion has given a definite character to something
present-at-hand, it says something about it as a  “what”;  and  this  “what”  is
drawn  from  that  which  is  present-at-hand  as  such.  The  as-structure  of
interpretation has undergone a modification. In its function of appropriating

what  is  understood,  the  ‘as’  no  longer  reaches  out  into  a  totality  of
involvements.  As  regards  its  possibilities  for  Articulating  reference-
relations,  it  has  been  cut  off  from  that  significance  which,  as  such,
constitutes  environmentality.  The  ‘as’  gets  pushed  back  into  the  uniform
plane of that which is merely present-at-hand. It dwindles to the structure of
just  letting  one  see  what  is  present-at-hand,  and  letting  one  see  it  in  a
definite  way.  This  levelling  of  the  primordial  ‘as’  of  circumspective
interpretation  to  the  “as”  with  which  presence-at-hand  is  given  a  definite
character is the specialty of assertion. Only so does it obtain the possibility
of exhibiting something in such a way that we just look at it.

Thus  assertion  cannot  disown 

from  an
interpretation  which  understands.  The  primordial  ‘as’  of  an  interpretation
(ἑρμηνεία)  which  understands  circumspectively  we  call  the  “existential-
hermeneutical  ‘as’  ”  in  distinction  from  the  “apophantical  ‘as’  ”  of  the
assertion.

its  ontological  origin 

Between  the  kind  of  interpretation  which  is  still  wholly  wrapped  up  in
concernful  understanding  and  the  extreme  opposite  case  of  a  theoretical
assertion  about  something  present-at-hand,  there  are  many  intermediate
gradations: assertions about the happenings in the environment, accounts of
the ready-to-hand, ‘reports on the Situation’, the recording and fixing of the
‘facts  of  the  case’,  the  description  of  a  state  of  affairs,  the  narration  of
something  that  has  befallen.  We  cannot  trace  back  these  ‘sentences’  to
theoretical statements without essentially perverting their meaning. Like the
in
theoretical 
circumspective interpretation.

they  have 

themselves, 

statements 

‘source’ 

their 

With the progress of knowledge about the structure of the λόγος, it was
inevitable that this phenomenon of the apophantical ‘as’ should come into
view  in  some  form  or  other.  The  manner  in  which  it  was  proximally  seen
was  not  accidental,  and  did  not  fail  to  work  itself  out  in  the  subsequent
history of logic.

H. 159

 

When  considered  philosophically,  the  λόγος  itself  is  an  entity,  and,
according to the orientation of ancient ontology, it is something present-at-
hand. Words are proximally present-at-hand; that is to say, we come across
them  just  as  we  come  across  Things;  and  this  holds  for  any  sequence  of

words, as that in which the λόγος expresses itself. In this first search for the
structure  of  the  λόγος  as  thus  present-at-hand,  what  was  found  was  the
Being-present-at-hand-together  of  several  words.  What  establishes  the
unity  of  this  “together”?  As  Plato  knew,  this  unity  lies  in  the  fact  that  the
λόγος is always λόγος  τινός. In  the λόγος  an  entity  is  manifest,  and  with  a
view to this entity, the words are put together in one verbal whole. Aristotle
saw this more radically: every λόγος is both σύνθεσις and διαίρεσις, not just
the  one  (call  it  ‘affirmative  judgment’)  or  the  other  (call  it  ‘negative
judgment’). Rather, every assertion, whether it affirms or denies, whether it
is  true  or  false,  is  σύνθεσις  and  διαίρεσις  equiprimordially.  To  exhibit
anything  is  to  take  it  together  and  take  it  apart.  It  is  true,  of  course,  that
Aristotle  did  not  pursue  the  analytical  question  as  far  as  the  problem  of
which phenomenon within the structure of the λόγος is the one that permits
and  indeed  obliges  us  to  characterize  every  statement  as  synthesis  and
diaeresis.

Along with the formal structures of ‘binding’ and ‘separating’—or, more
precisely, along with the unity of these—we should meet the phenmenon of
the ‘something as something’, and we should meet this as a phenomenon. In
accordance  with  this  structure,  something  is  understood  with  regard  to
something:  it  is  taken  together  with  it,  yet  in  such  a  way  that  this
confrontation which understands will at the same time take apart what has
been taken together, and will do so by Articulating it interpretatively. If the
phenomenon of the ‘as’ remains covered up, and, above all, if its existential
then  Aristotle’s
source 
phenomenological  approach  to  the  analysis  of  the  λόγος  collapses  to  a
superficial ‘theory of judgment’, in which judgment becomes the binding or
separating of representations and concepts.

the  hermeneutical 

is  veiled, 

‘as’ 

in 

Binding  and  separating  may  be  formalized  still  further  to  a  ‘relating’.
The judgment gets dissolved logistically into a system in which things are
‘co-ordinated’ with one another; it becomes the object of a ‘calculus’; but it
does not become a theme for ontological Interpretation. The possibility and
impossibility  of  getting  an  analytical  understanding  of  σύνθεσις  and
διαίρεσις—of the ‘relation’ in judgment generally—is tightly linked up with
whatever the current status of the ontological problematic and its principles
may be.

H. 160

 

into 

its  way 

How  far  this  problematic  has  worked  its  way  into  the  Interpretation  of
the λόγος, and how far on the other hand the concept of ‘judgment’ has (by
the  ontological
a  remarkable  counter-thrust)  worked 
problematic, is shown by the phenomenon of the copula. When we consider
this  ‘bond’,  it  becomes  clear  that  proximally  the  synthesis-structure  is
regarded as self-evident, and that it has also retained the function of serving
as a standard for Interpretation. But if the formal characteristics of ‘relating’
and  ‘binding’  can  contribute  nothing  phenomenally  towards  the  structural
analysis of the λόγος as subject-matter, then in the long run the phenomenon
to which we allude by the term “copula” has nothing to do with a bond or
binding.  The  Interpretation  of  the  ‘is’,  whether  it  be  expressed  in  its  own
right  in  the  language  or  indicated  in  the  verbal  ending,  leads  us  therefore
into  the  context  of  problems  belonging  to  the  existential  analytic,  if
assertion and the understanding of Being are existential possibilities for the
Being  of  Dasein  itself.  When  we  come  to  work  out  the  question  of  Being
(cf.  Part  I,  Division  3),(1)  we  shall  thus  encounter  again  this  peculiar
phenomenon of Being which we meet within the λόγος.
 

1. This Division has never appeared.

By  demonstrating  that  assertion  is  derived  from  interpretation  and
understanding, we have made it plain that the ‘logic’ of the λόγος is rooted
in  the  existential  analytic  of  Dasein;  and  provisionally  this  has  been
sufficient. At the same time, by knowing that the λόγος has been Interpreted
in  a  way  which  is  ontologically  inadequate,  we  have  gained  a  sharper
insight  into  the  fact  that  the  methodological  basis  on  which  ancient
ontology  arose  was  not  a  primordial  one.  The  λόγος  gets  experienced  as
something present-at-hand and Interpreted as such, while at the same time
the entities which it points out have the meaning of presence-at-hand. This
meaning  of  Being  is  left  undifferentiated  and  uncontrasted  with  other
possibilities  of  Being,  so  that  Being  in  the  sense  of  a  formal  Being-
something becomes fused with it simultaneously, and we are unable even to
obtain a clear-cut division between these two realms.

34. Being-there and Discourse. Language

 

 

H. 161

The fundamental existentialia which constitute the Being of the “there”,
the  disclosedness  of  Being-in-the-world,  are 
states-of-mind  and
understanding. In understanding, there lurks the possibility of interpretation
—that is, of appropriating what is understood. In so far as a state-of-mind is
equiprimordial with an act of understanding, it maintains itself in a certain
understanding.  Thus  there  corresponds  to  it  a  certain  capacity  for  getting
interpreted. We have seen that assertion is derived from interpretation, and
is an extreme case of it. In clarifying the third signification of assertion as
communication  (speaking  forth),  we  were  led  to  the  concepts  of  “saying”
and  “speaking”,  to  which  we  had  purposely  given  no  attention  up  to  that
point. The fact that language now becomes our theme for the first time will
indicate that this phenomenon has its roots in the existential constitution of
Dasein’s disclosedness. The existential-ontological  foundation  of  language
is  discourse  or  talk.(1)  This  phenomenon  is  one  of  which  we  have  been
making  constant  use  already  in  our  foregoing  Interpretation  of  state-of-
mind, understanding, interpretation, and assertion; but we have, as it were,
kept it suppressed in our thematic analysis.
 

1. ‘Rede’. As we have pointed out earlier (see our note 3, H. 25 above), we have translated this
word either as ‘discourse’ or ‘talk’, as the context seems to demand, sometimes compromising with
the hendiadys ‘discourse or talk’. But in some contexts ‘discourse’ is too formal while ‘talk’ is too
colloquial;  the  reader  must  remember  that  there  is  no  good  English  equivalent  for  ‘Rede’.  For  a
previous discussion see Section 7 B above (H. 32-34).

Discourse 

is  existentially  equiprimordial  with  state-of-mind  and
understanding. The intelligibility of something has always been articulated,
even before there is any appropriative interpretation of it. Discourse is the
Articulation of intelligibility. Therefore it underlies both interpretation and
assertion.  That  which  can  be  Articulated  in  interpretation,  and  thus  even
more  primordially  in  discourse,  is  what  we  have  called  “meaning”.  That
which  gets  articulated  as  such  in  discursive  Articulation,  we  call  the
“totality-of-significations”  [Bedeutungsganze].  This  can  be  dissolved  or
broken  up  into  significations.  Significations,  as  what  has  been  Articulated
from  that  which  can  be  Articulated,  always  carry  meaning  [...sind…
sinnhaft].  If  discourse,  as  the  Articulation  of  the  intelligibility  of  the

“there”, is a primordial existentiale of disclosedness, and if disclosedness is
primarily constituted  by Being-in-the-world,  then  discourse too  must have
essentially a kind of Being which is specifically worldly. The intelligibility
of Being-in-the-world—an intelligibility which goes with a state-of-mind—
expresses itself  as discourse. The totality-of-significations  of intelligibility
is put into words. To significations, words accrue. But word-Things do not
get supplied with significations.

The way in which discourse gets expressed is languge.(1) Language is a
totality of words—a totality in which discourse has a ‘worldly’ Being of its
own;  and  as  an  entity  within-the-world,  this  totality  thus  becomes
something which we may come across as ready-to-hand. Language can be
broken  up  into  word-Things  which  are  present-at-hand.  Discourse  is
existentially 
it
Articulates according to significations, has, as its kind of Being, Being-in-
the-world—a Being which has been thrown and submitted to the ‘world’.

that  entity  whose  disclosedness 

language,  because 

As  an  existential  state  in  which  Dasein  is  disclosed,  discourse  is
constitutive for Dasein’s existence. Hearing and keeping silent [Schweigen]
are  possibilities  belonging  to  discursive  speech.  In  these  phenomena  the
constitutive function of discourse for the existentiality of existence becomes
entirely plain for the first time. But in the first instance the issue is one of
working out the structure of discourse as such.

H. 162

 

Discoursing  or  talking  is  the  way  in  which  we  articulate  ‘significantly’
the  intelligibility  of  Being-in-the-world.  Being-with  belongs  to  Being-in-
the-world,  which  in  every  case  maintains  itself  in  some  definite  way  of
concernful  Being-with-one-another.  Such  Being-with-one-another 
is
discursive  as  assenting  or  refusing,  as  demanding  or  warning,  as
pronouncing,  consulting,  or  interceding,  as  ‘making  assertions’,  and  as
talking  in  the  way  of  ‘giving  a  talk’.(2)  Talking  is  talk  about  something.
That  which  the  discourse  is  about  [das  Worüber  der  Rede]  does  not
necessarily or even for the most part serve as the theme for an assertion in
which one gives something a definite character. Even a command is given
about something; a wish is about something. And so is intercession. What
the  discourse is  about  is  a structural  item  that it necessarily possesses; for
discourse helps to constitute the disclosedness of Being-in-the-world, and in

its  own  structure  it  is  modelled  upon  this  basic  state  of  Dasein.  What  is
talked about [das Beredete] in talk is always ‘talked to’ [“angeredet”] in a
definite  regard  and  within  certain  limits.  In  any  talk  or  discourse,  there  is
something said-in-the-talk  as  such  [ein  Geredetes  as  solches]—something
said  as  such  [das...  Gesagte  als  solches]  whenever  one  wishes,  asks,  or
expresses  oneself  about  something.  In  this  “something  said”,  discourse
communicates.
 

1. ‘Die Hinausgesprochenheit der Rede ist die Sprache.’
2.  ‘Dieses  ist  redend  als  zu-  und  absagen,  auffordern,  warnen,  als  Aussprache,  Rücksprache,

Fürsprache, ferner als “Aussagen machen” und als reden in der Weise des “Redenhaltens”.’

As  we  have  already  indicated  in  our  analysis  of  assertion,(1)  the
phenomenon  of  communication  must  be  understood  in  a  sense  which  is
ontologically  broad.  ‘Communication’  in  which  one  makes  assertions—
giving  information,  for  instance—is  a  special  case  of  that  communication
which  is  grasped  in  principle  existentially.  In  this  more  general  kind  of
communication, the Articulation of Being with one another understandingly
is  constituted.  Through  it  a  co-state-of-mind  [Mitbefindlichkeit]  gets
‘shared’,  and  so  does  the  understanding  of  Being-with.  Communication  is
never anything like a conveying of experiences, such as opinions or wishes,
from the interior of one subject into the interior of another. Dasein-with is
already  essentially  manifest  in  a  co-state-of-mind  and  a  co-understanding.
In  discourse  Being-with  becomes  ‘explicitly’  shared;  that  is  to  say,  it  is
already, but it is unshared as something that has not been taken hold of and
appropriated.(2)
 

1. Reading ‘...bei der Analyse der Aussage...’ with the older editions. The words ‘der Aussage’

have been omitted in the newer editions.

nicht ergriffenes und zugeeignetes.’

2. ‘Das Mitsein wird in der Rede “ausdrücklich” geteilt, das heisst es ist schon, nur ungeteilt als

Whenever something is communicated in what is said-in-the-talk, all talk
about  anything  has  at  the  same  time  the  character  of  expressing  itself
[Sichaussprechens]. In  talking,  Dasein  expresses  itself  [spricht  sich...  aus]
not  because  it  has,  in  the  first  instance,  been  encapsulated  as  something
‘internal’  over  against  something  outside,  but  because  as  Being-in-the-
world  it  is  already  ‘outside’  when  it  understands.  What  is  expressed  is
precisely this Being-outside—that is to say, the way in which one currently

has  a  state-of-mind  (mood),  which  we  have  shown  to  pertain  to  the  full
disclosedness of Being-in. Being-in and its state-of-mind are made known
in discourse and indicated in language by intonation, modulation, the tempo
of talk, ‘the way of speaking’. In ‘poetical’ discourse, the communication of
the  existential  possibilities  of  one’s  state-of-mind  can  become  an  aim  in
itself, and this amounts to a disclosing of existence.

H. 163

 

In  discourse  the  intelligibility  of  Being-in-the-world  (an  intelligibility
which goes with a state-of-mind) is articulated according to significations;
and  discourse  is  this  articulation.  The  items  constitutive  for  discourse  are:
what the discourse is about (what is talked about); what is said-in-the-talk,
as  such;  the  communication;  and  the  making-known.  These  are  not
properties which can just be raked up empirically from language. They are
existential characteristics rooted in the state of Dasein’s Being, and it is they
that first make anything like language ontologically possible. In the factical
linguistic form of any definite case of discourse, some of these items may
be lacking, or may remain unnoticed. The fact that they often do not receive
‘verbal’ expression, is merely an index of some definite kind of discourse
which, in so far as it is discourse, must in every case lie within the totality
of the structures we have mentioned.

Attempts  to  grasp  the  ‘essence  of  language’  have  always  taken  their
orientation  from  one  or  another  of  these  items;  and  the  clues  to  their
conceptions of language have been the ideas of ‘expression’, of ‘symbolic
form’,  of  communication  as  ‘assertion’,(1)  of  the  ‘making-known’  of
experiences, of the ‘patterning’ of life. Even if one were to put these various
fragmentary  definitions  together  in  syncretistic  fashion,  nothing  would  be
achieved in the way of a fully adequate definition of “language”. We would
still  have  to  do  what  is  decisive  here—to  work  out  in  advance  the
ontologico-existential whole of the structure of discourse on the basis of the
analytic of Dasein.

We can make clear the connection of discourse with understanding and
intelligibility  by  considering  an  existential  possibility  which  belongs  to
talking  itself—hearing.  If  we  have not  heard  ‘aright’,  it is  not  by accident
that we say we have not ‘understood’. Hearing is constitutive for discourse.
And  just  as  linguistic  utterance  is  based  on  discourse,  so  is  acoustic

perception on hearing. Listening to... is Dasein’s existential way of Being-
open as Being-with for Others. Indeed, hearing constitutes the primary and
authentic  way  in  which  Dasein  is  open  for  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-
Being—as  in  hearing  the  voice  of  the  friend  whom  every  Dasein  carries
with it. Dasein hears, because it understands. As a Being-in-the-world with
Others, a Being which understands, Dasein is ‘in thrall’ to Dasein-with and
to itself; and in this thraldom it “belongs” to these.(2) Being-with develops
in  listening  to  one  another  [Aufeinander-hören],  which  can  be  done  in
several  possible  ways:  following,(3)  going  along  with,  and  the  privative
modes of not-hearing, resisting, defying, and turning away.
 

1. ‘…der Mitteilung als “Aussage”...’ The quotation marks around ‘Aussage’ appear only in the

newer editions.

2.  ‘Als  verstehendes  In-der-Welt-sein  mit  den  Anderen  ist  es  dem  Mitdasein  und  ihm  selbst
“hörig” und in dieser Hörigkeit zugehörig.’ In this sentence Heidegger uses some cognates of ‘hören’
(‘hearing’) whose interrelations disappear in our version.

3. ‘...des Folgens...’ In the earlier editions there are quotation marks around ‘Folgens’.

It  is  on  the  basis  of  this  potentiality  for  hearing,  which  is  existentially
primary,  that  anything  like  hearkening  [Horchen]  becomes  possible.
Hearkening is phenomenally still more primordial than what is defined ‘in
the first instance’ as “hearing” in psychology—the sensing of tones and the
perception of sounds. Hearkening too has the kind of Being of the hearing
which  understands.  What  we  ‘first’  hear  is  never  noises  or  complexes  of
sounds, but the creaking waggon, the motor-cycle. We hear the column on
the march, the north wind, the woodpecker tapping, the fire crackling.

H. 164

 

It  requires  a  very  artificial  and  complicated  frame  of  mind  to  ‘hear’  a
‘pure  noise’.  The  fact  that  motor-cycles  and  waggons  are  what  we
proximally  hear  is  the  phenomenal  evidence  that  in  every  case  Dasein,  as
Being-in-the-world, already dwells alongside what is ready-to-hand within-
the-world; it certainly does not dwell proximally alongside ‘sensations’; nor
would  it  first  have  to  give  shape  to  the  swirl  of  sensations  to  provide  the
springboard  from  which  the  subject  leaps  off  and  finally  arrives  at  a
‘world’. Dasein, as essentially understanding, is proximally alongside what
is understood.

Likewise,  when  we  are  explicitly  hearing  the  discourse  of  another,  we
proximally  understand  what  is  said,  or—to  put  it  more  exactly—we  are
already  with  him,  in  advance,  alongside  the  entity  which  the  discourse  is
about. On the other hand, what we proximally hear is not what is expressed
in the utterance. Even in cases where the speech is indistinct or in a foreign
language,  what  we  proximally  hear  is  unintelligible  words,  and  not  a
multiplicity of tone-data.(1)

Admittedly,  when  what  the  discourse  is  about  is  heard  ‘naturally’,  we
can  at  the  same  time  hear  the  ‘diction’,  the  way  in  which  it  is  said  [die
Weise  des  Gesagtseins],  but  only  if  there  is  some  co-understanding
beforehand  of  what  is  said-in-the-talk;  for  only  so  is  there  a  possibility  of
estimating  whether  the  way  in  which  it  is  said  is  appropriate  to  what  the
discourse is about thematically.

In the same way, any answering counter-discourse arises proximally and
directly  from  understanding  what  the  discourse  is  about,  which  is  already
‘shared’ in Being-with.

Only  where  talking  and  hearing  are  existentially  possible,  can  anyone
hearken. The person who ‘cannot hear’ and ‘must feel’(2) may perhaps be
one  who  is  able  to  hearken  very  well,  and  precisely  because  of  this.  Just
hearing something “all around” [Das Nur-herum-hören] is a privation of the
hearing  which  understands.  Both  talking  and  hearing  are  based  upon
understanding.  And  understanding  arises  neither  through  talking  at  length
[vieles Reden] nor through busily hearing something “all around”. Only he
who already understands can listen [zuhören].
 

1.  Here  we  follow  the  reading  of  the  newer  editions:  ‘...nicht  eine  Mannigfaltigkeit  von

Tondaten.’ The older editions have ‘reine’ instead of ‘eine’.

2. The author is here alluding to the German proverb, ‘Wer nicht hören kann, muss fühlen.’ (I.e.

he who cannot heed, must suffer.)

H. 165

 

Keeping silent is another essential possibility of discourse, and it has the
same  existential  foundation.  In  talking  with  one  another,  the  person  who
keeps  silent  can  ‘make  one  understand’  (that  is,  he  can  develop  an
understanding), and he can do so more authentically than the person who is
never  short  of  words.  Speaking  at  length  [Viel-sprechen]  about  something
does  not  offer  the  slightest  guarantee  that  thereby  understanding  is

advanced.  On  the  contrary,  talking  extensively  about  something,  covers  it
up and brings what is understood to a sham clarity—the unintelligibility of
the trivial. But to keep silent does not mean to be dumb. On the contrary, if
a  man  is  dumb,  he  still  has  a  tendency  to  ‘speak’.  Such  a  person  has  not
proved that he can keep silence; indeed, he entirely lacks the possibility of
proving anything of the sort. And the person who is accustomed by Nature
to speak little is no better able to show that he is keeping silent or that he is
the sort of person who can do so. He who never says anything cannot keep
silent at any given moment. Keeping silent authentically is possible only in
genuine discoursing. To be able to keep silent, Dasein must have something
to  say—that  is,  it  must  have  at  its  disposal  an  authentic  and  rich
disclosedness  of  itself.  In  that  case  one’s  reticence  [Verschwiegenheit]
makes something manifest, and does away with ‘idle talk’ [“Gerede”]. As a
mode of discoursing, reticence Articulates the intelligibility of Dasein in so
primordial a manner that it gives rise to a Potentiality-for-hearing which is
genuine, and to a Being-with-one-another which is transparent.

Because discourse is constitutive for the Being of the “there” (that is, for
states-of-mind  and  understanding),  while  “Dasein”  means  Being-in-the-
world,  Dasein  as  discursive  Being-in,  has  already  expressed  itself.  Dasein
has  language.  Among  the  Greeks,  their  everyday  existing  was  largely
diverted into talking with one another, but at the same time they ‘had eyes’
to  see.  Is  it  an  accident  that  in  both  their  pre-philosophical  and  their
philosophical ways of interpreting Dasein, they defined the essence of man
as ζῷον λόγον ἔχον? The later way of interpreting this definition of man in
the  sense  of  the animal  rationale, ‘something  living  which  has  reason’,  is
not indeed ‘false’, but it covers up the phenomenal basis for this definition
of  “Dasein”.  Man  shows  himself  as  the  entity  which  talks.  This  does  not
signify that the possibility of vocal utterance is peculiar to him, but rather
that he is the entity which is such as to discover the world and Dasein itself.
The Greeks had no word for “language”; they understood this phenomenon
‘in  the  first  instance’  as  discourse.  But  because  the  λόγος  came  into  their
philosophical  ken  primarily  as  assertion, this was  the  kind  of  logos which
they took as their clue for working out the basic structures of the forms of
discourse  and  its  components.  Grammar  sought  its  foundations  in  the
‘logic’  of  this  logos.  But  this  logic  was  based  upon  the  ontology  of  the
present-at-hand.  The  basic  stock  of  ‘categories  of  signification’,  which
passed over into the subsequent science of language, and which in principle

is  still  accepted  as  the  standard  today,  is  oriented  towards  discourse  as
assertion.  But  if  on  the  contrary  we  take  this  phenomenon  to  have  in
principle  the  primordiality  and  breadth  of  an  existentiale,  then  there
emerges  the  necessity  of  re-establishing  the  science  of  language  on
foundations which are ontologically more primordial. The task of liberating
grammar  from  logic  requires  beforehand  a  positive  understanding  of  the
basic a priori structure of discourse in general as an existentiale.

H. 166

 

It  is  not  a  task  that  can  be  carried  through  later  on  by  improving  and
rounding  out  what  has  been  handed  down.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  must
inquire  into  the  basic  forms  in  which  it  is  possible  to  articulate  anything
understandable,  and  to  do  so  in  accordance  with  significations;  and  this
articulation  must  not  be  confined  to  entities  within-the-world  which  we
cognize  by  considering  them  theoretically,  and  which  we  express  in
sentences. A doctrine of signification will not emerge automatically even if
we  make  a  comprehensive  comparison  of  as  many  languages  as  possible,
and  those  which  are  most  exotic.  To  accept,  let  us  say,  the  philosophical
horizon  within  which  W.  von  Humboldt  made  language  a  problem,  would
be no less inadequate. The doctrine of signification is rooted in the ontology
of  Dasein.  Whether  it  prospers  or  decays  depends  on  the  fate  of  this
ontology.(x)
 

x.  On  the  doctrine  of  signification,  cf.  Edmund  Husserl,  Logische  Untersuchungen,  vol.  II,
Investigations  I,  IV-VI.  See  further  the  more  radical  version  of  the  problematic  in  his  Ideen  I,
Sections 123 ff., pp. 255 ff.
 

In the last resort, philosophical research must resolve to ask what kind of
Being  goes  with  language  in  general.  Is  it  a  kind  of  equipment  ready-to-
hand within-the-world, or has it Dasein’s kind of Being, or is it neither of
these? What kind of Being does language have, if there can be such a thing
as a ‘dead’ language? What do the “rise” and “decline” of a language mean
ontologically?  We  possess  a  science  of  language,  and  the  Being  of  the
entities  which  it  has  for  its  theme  is  obscure.  Even  the  horizon  for  any
investigative question about it is veiled. Is it an accident that proximally and
for  the  most  part  significations  are  ‘worldly’,  sketched  out  beforehand  by
the  significance  of  the  world,  that  they  are  indeed  often  predominantly

‘spatial’? Or does this ‘fact’ have existential-ontological necessity? And if it
is  necessary,  why  should  it  be  so?  Philosophical  research  will  have  to
dispense  with  the  ‘philosophy  of  language’  if  it  is  to  inquire  into  ‘the
‘things  themselves’  and  attain  the  status  of  a  problematic  which  has  been
cleared up conceptually.

Our Interpretation of language has been designed merely to point out the
ontological  ‘locus’  of  this  phenomenon  in  Dasein’s  state  of  Being,  and
especially to prepare the way for the following analysis, in which, taking as
our clue a fundamental kind of Being belonging to discourse, in connection
with  other  phenomena,  we  shall  try  to  bring  Dasein’s  everydayness  into
view in a manner which is ontologically more primordial.

B. The Everyday Being of the “There”, and the Falling of Dasein

 

 

H. 167

In going back to the existential structures of the disclosedness of Being-
in-the-world,  our  Interpretation  has,  in  a  way,  lost  sight  of  Dasein’s
everydayness. In our analysis, we must now regain this phenomenal horizon
which was our thematical starting-point. The question now arises: what are
the existential characteristics of the disclosedness of Being-in-the-world, so
far as the latter, as something which is everyday, maintains itself in the kind
of  Being  of  the  “they”?  Does  the  “they”  have  a  state-of-mind  which  is
specific  to  it,  a  special  way  of  understanding,  talking,  and  interpreting?  It
becomes all the more urgent to answer these questions when we remember
that proximally and for the most part Dasein is absorbed in the “they” and is
mastered  by  it.  Is  not  Dasein,  as  thrown  Being-in-the-world,  thrown
proximally  right  into  the  publicness  of  the  “they”?  And  what  does  this
publicness mean, other than the specific disclosedness of the “they”?

If  understanding  must  be  conceived  primarily  as  Dasein’s  potentiality-
for-Being,  then  it  is  from  an  analysis  of  the  way  of  understanding  and
interpreting  which  belongs  to  the  “they”  that  we  must  gather  which
possibilities of its Being have been disclosed and appropriated by Dasein as
“they”. In that case, however, these possibilities themselves make manifest
an  essential  tendency  of  Being—one  which  belongs  to  everydayness.  And
finally, when this tendency has been explicated in an ontologically adequate

manner, it must unveil a primordial kind of Being of Dasein, in such a way,
indeed, that from this kind of Being(1) the phenomenon of thrownness, to
which  we  have  called  attention,  can  be  exhibited  in  its  existential
concreteness.

In  the  first  instance  what  is  required  is  that  the  disclosedness  of  the
“they”—that  is,  the  everyday  kind  of  Being  of  discourse,  sight,  and
interpretation—should  be  made  visible  in  certain  definite  phenomena.  In
relation to these phenomena, it may not be superfluous to remark that our
own Interpretation is purely ontological in its aims, and is far removed from
any  moralizing  critique  of  everyday  Dasein,  and  from  the  aspirations  of  a
‘philosophy of culture’.
 

1. Reading ‘...von ihr aus...’ The ear1iest editions omit ‘aus’; correction is made in a list of errata.

35. Idle Talk

H. 168

 

 

The  expression  ‘idle  talk’  [“Gerede”]  is  not  to  be  used  here  in  a
‘disparaging’(1)  signification.  Terminologically,  it  signifies  a  positive
phenomenon  which  constitutes  the  kind  of  Being  of  everyday  Dasein’s
understanding and interpreting. For the most part, discourse is expressed by
being spoken out, and has always been so expressed; it is language.(2) But
in  that  case  understanding  and  interpretation  already  lie  in  what  has  thus
been expressed. In language, as a way things have been expressed or spoken
out [Ausgesprochenheit],there is hidden a way in which the understanding
of Dasein has been interpreted. This way of interpreting it is no more just
present-at-hand  than  language  is;  on  the  contrary,  its  Being  is  itself  of  the
character  of  Dasein.  Proximally,  and  with  certain  limits,  Dasein  is
constantly  delivered  over  to  this  interpretedness,  which  controls  and
distributes  the  possibilities  of  average  understanding  and  of  the  state-of-
mind belonging to it. The way things have been expressed or spoken out is
such  that  in  the  totality  of  contexts  of  signification  into  which  it  has  been
articulated,  it  preserves  an  understanding  of  the  disclosed  world  and
therewith, equiprimordially, an understanding of the Dasein-with of Others
and of one’s own Being-in. The understanding which has thus already been

“deposited” in the way things have been expressed, pertains just as much to
any traditional discoveredness of entities which may have been reached, as
it does to one’s current understanding of Being and to whatever possibilities
and  horizons  for  fresh  interpretation  and  conceptual  Articulation  may  be
available.  But  now  we  must  go  beyond  a  bare  allusion  to  the  Fact  of  this
interpretedness  of  Dasein,  and  must  inquire  about  the  existential  kind  of
Being  of  that  discourse  which  is  expressed  and  which  expresses  itself.  If
this  cannot  be  conceived  as  something  present-at-hand,  what  is  its  Being,
and  what  does  this  tell  us  in  principle  about  Dasein’s  everyday  kind  of
Being?
 

1.  These  quotation  marks  are  supplied  only  in  the  older  editions.  (It  is  not  easy  to  translate
‘Gerede’ in a way which does not carry disparaging connotations. Fortunately Heidegger makes his
meaning quite clear.)

2. ‘Die Rede spricht sich zumeist aus und hat sich schon immer ausgesprochen. Sie ist Sprache.’
As  we  have  pointed  out  earlier  (see  our  note  1,  H.  149  above),  it  is  often  sufficient  to  translate
‘aussprechen’  as  ‘express’.  In  the  present  passage,  however,  the  connotation  of  ‘speaking  out’  or
‘uttering’  seems  especially  important;  we  shall  occasionally  make  it  explicit  in  our  translation  by
hendiadys or other devices.

Discourse  which  expresses  itself  is  communication.  Its  tendency  of
Being  is  aimed  at  bringing  the  hearer  to  participate  in  disclosed  Being
towards what is talked about in the discourse.

In the language which is spoken when one expresses oneself, there lies
an  average  intelligibility;  and  in  accordance  with  this  intelligibility  the
discourse  which  is  communicated  can  be  understood  to  a  considerable
extent, even if the hearer does not bring himself into such a kind of Being
towards what the discourse is about as to have a primordial understanding
of it. We do not so much understand the entities which are talked about; we
already are listening only to what is said-in-the-talk as such. What is said-
in-the-talk  gets  understood;  but  what  the  talk  is  about  is  understood  only
approximately and superficially. We have the same thing in view, because it
is in the same averageness that we have a common understanding of what is
said.

Hearing and understanding have attached themselves beforehand to what
is  said-in-the-talk  as  such.  The  primary  relationship-of-Being  towards  the
entity talked about is not ‘imparted’ by communication;(1) but Being-with-
one-another  takes  place  in  talking  with  one  another  and  in  concern  with
what is said-in-the-talk. To this Being-with-one-another, the fact that talking

for 

[Ausspruch]—all 

these  now  stand  surety 

is going on is a matter of consequence.(2) The Being-said, the dictum, the
pronouncement 
the
genuineness of the discourse and of the understanding which belongs to it,
and  for  its  appropriateness  to  the  facts.  And  because  this  discoursing  has
lost  its  primary  relationship-of-Being  towards  the  entity  talked  about,  or
else  has  never  achieved  such  a  relationship,  it  does  not  communicate  in
such a way as to let this entity be appropriated in a primordial manner, but
communicates  rather  by  following  the  route  of  gossiping and  passing  the
word along.(3) What is said-in-the-talk as such, spreads in wider circles and
takes on an authoritative character. Things are so because one says so. Idle
talk  is  constituted  by  just  such  gossiping  and  passing  the  word  along—a
process by which its initial lack of grounds to stand on [Bodenständigkeit]
becomes  aggravated  to  complete  groundlessness  [Bodenlosigkeit].  And
indeed  this  idle  talk  is  not  confined  to  vocal  gossip,  but  even  spreads  to
what we write, where it takes the form of ‘scribbling’ [das “Geschreibe”].
In  this  latter  case  the  gossip  is  not  based  so  much  upon  hearsay.  It  feeds
upon superficial reading [dem Angelesenen]. The average understanding of
the  reader  will  never  be  able  to  decide  what  has  been  drawn  from
primordial  sources  with  a  struggle  and  how  much  is  just  gossip.  The
average  understanding,  moreover,  will  not  want  any  such  distinction,  and
does not need it, because, of course, it understands everything.
 

1. ‘Die Mitteilung “teilt” nicht den primären Seinsbezug zum beredeten Seienden...’
2.  ‘Ihm  liegt  daran,  dass  geredet  wird.’  We  have  interpreted  ‘Ihm’  as  referring  to  ‘das

Miteinandersein’, but other interpretations are grammatically possible.

3. ‘...sondern auf dem Wege des Weiter- und Nachredens.’

H. 169

 

The  groundlessness  of  idle  talk  is  no  obstacle  to  its  becoming  public;
instead  it  encourages  this.  Idle  talk  is  the  possibility  of  understanding
everything  without  previously  making  the  thing  one’s  own.  If  this  were
done, idle talk would founder; and it already guards against such a danger.
Idle  talk  is  something  which  anyone  can  rake  up;  it  not  only  releases  one
from the task of genuinely understanding, but develops an undifferentiated
kind of intelligibility, for which nothing is closed off any longer.

Discourse, which belongs to the essential state of Dasein’s Being and has
a  share  in  constituting  Dasein’s  disclosedness,  has  the  possibility  of

becoming  idle  talk.  And  when  it  does  so,  it  serves  not  so  much  to  keep
Being-in-the-world open for us in an articulated understanding, as rather to
close it off, and cover up the entities within-the-world. To do this, one need
not aim to deceive. Idle talk does not have the kind of Being which belongs
to  consciously  passing  off  something  as  something  else.  The  fact  that
something has been said groundlessly, and then gets passed along in further
retelling, amounts to perverting the act of disclosing [Erschliessen] into an
act  of  closing  off  [Verschliessen].  For  what  is  said  is  always  understood
proximally as ‘saying’ something—that is, an uncovering something. Thus,
by its very nature, idle talk is a closing-off, since to go back to the ground
of what is talked about is something which it leaves undone.

This closing-off is aggravated afresh by the fact that an understanding of
what is talked about is supposedly reached in idle talk. Because of this, idle
talk discourages any new inquiry and any disputation, and in a peculiar way
suppresses them and holds them back.

H. 170

 

This way in which things have been interpreted in idle talk has already
established  itself  in  Dasein.  There  are  many  things  with  which  we  first
become  acquainted  in  this  way,  and  there  is  not  a  little  which  never  gets
beyond such an average understanding. This everyday way in which things
have  been  interpreted  is  one  into  which  Dasein  has  grown  in  the  first
instance, with never a possibility of extrication. In it, out of it, and against
it,  all  genuine  understanding,  interpreting,  and  communicating,  all  re-
discovering and appropriating anew, are performed. In no case is a Dasein,
untouched  and  unseduced  by  this  way  in  which  things  have  been
interpreted, set before the open country of a ‘world-in-itself’ so that it just
beholds  what  it  encounters.  The  dominance  of  the  public  way  in  which
things  have  been  interpreted  has  already  been  decisive  even  for  the
possibilities of having a mood—that is, for the basic way in which Dasein
lets the world “matter” to it.(1) The “they” prescribes one’s state-of-mind,
and determines what and how one ‘sees’.
 

1. ‘…über die Möglichkeiten des Gestimmtseins entschieden, das heisst über die Grundart, in der

sich das Dasein von der Welt angehen lässt.’ The second ‘über’ is found only in the later editions.

Idle talk, which closes things off in the way we have designated, is the
kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to  Dasein’s  understanding  when  that
understanding has been uprooted. But idle talk does not occur as a condition
which  is  present-at-hand  in  something  present-at-hand:  idle  talk  has  been
uprooted  existentially,  and  this  uprooting  is  constant.  Ontologically  this
means that when Dasein maintains itself in idle talk, it is—as Being-in-the-
world—cut off from its primary and primordially genuine relationships-of-
Being towards the world, towards Dasein-with, and towards its very Being-
in.  Such  a  Dasein  keeps  floating  unattached  [in  einer  Schwebe];  yet  in  so
doing, it is always alongside the world, with Others, and towards itself. To
be  uprooted  in  this  manner  is  a  possibility-of-Being  only  for  an  entity
whose  disclosedness  is  constituted  by  discourse  as  characterized  by
understanding  and  states-of-mind—that  is  to  say,  for  an  entity  whose
disclosedness, in  such an ontologically constitutive  state, is  its  “there”,  its
‘in-the-world’.  Far  from  amounting  to  a  “not-Being”  of  Dasein,  this
uprooting is rather Dasein’s most everyday and most stubborn ‘Reality’.

Yet  the  obviousness  and  self-assurance  of  the  average  ways  in  which
things have been interpreted, are such that while the particular Dasein drifts
along 
the
uncanniness  of  this  floating  remains  hidden  from  it  under  their  protecting
shelter.

towards  an  ever-increasing  groundlessness  as 

it  floats, 

36. Curiosity

 

In our analysis of understanding and of the disclosedness of the “there”
in  general,  we  have  alluded  to  the  lumen  naturale,  and  designated  the
disclosedness of Being-in as Dasein’s “clearing”, in which it first becomes
possible  to  have  something  like  sight.(1)  Our  conception  of  “sight”  has
been  gained  by  looking  at  the  basic  kind  of  disclosure  which  is
characteristic  of  Dasein—namely,  understanding,  in  the  sense  of  the
genuine appropriation of those entities towards which Dasein can comport
itself in accordance with its essential possibilities of Being.
 

1. See H. 133 above.

H. 171

 

 

the 

this 

tendency  by 

The  basic  state  of  sight  shows  itself  in  a  peculiar  tendency-of-Being
which  belongs  to  everydayness—the  tendency  towards  ‘seeing’.  We
term  “curiosity”  [Neugier],  which
designate 
characteristically  is  not  confined  to  seeing,  but  expresses  the  tendency
towards  a  peculiar  way  of  letting  the  world  be  encountered  by  us  in
perception.  Our  aim  in  Interpreting  this  phenomenon  is  in  principle  one
which  is  existential-ontological.  We  do  not  restrict  ourselves  to  an
orientation  towards  cognition.  Even  at  an  early  date  (and  in  Greek
philosophy  this  was  no  accident)  cognition  was  conceived  in  terms  of  the
‘desire  to  see’.(1)  The  treatise  which  stands  first  in  the  collection  of
Aristotle’s treatises on ontology begins with the sentence: πάντες ἄνθρωποι
τοῦ  εἰδέναι  ὀρέγονται  φύσει.(xi)  The  care  for  seeing  is  essential  to  man’s
Being.(2) This remark introduces an investigation in which Aristotle seeks
to uncover the source of all learned exploration of entities and their Being,
by  deriving  it  from  that  species  of  Dasein’s  Being  which  we  have  just
mentioned. This Greek Interpretation of the existential genesis of science is
not  accidental.  It  brings  to  explicit  understanding  what  has  already  been
sketched out beforehand in the principle of Parmenides: τὸ γὰρ  αὐτὸ  νοεῖν
ἐστίν τε καὶ εἶναι.(3) Being is that which shows itself in the pure perception
which  belongs  to  beholding,  and  only  by  such  seeing  does  Being  get
discovered. Primordial and genuine truth lies in pure beholding. This thesis
has  remained  the  foundation  of  western  philosophy  ever  since.  The
Hegelian dialectic found in it its motivating conception, and is possible only
on the basis of it.
 

xi. Aristotle, Metaphysica A 1, 980 a 21.

1. ‘…nicht in der verengten Orientierung am Erkennen, das schon früh und in der griechischen
Philosophie  nicht  zufällig aus der “Lust zu  sehen” begriffen wird.’ The  earlier  editions  have  ‘...am
Erkennen, als welches schon früh…’

2.  While  the  sentence  from  Aristotle  is  usually  translated,  ‘All  men  by  nature  desire  to  know’,
Heidegger  takes  εἰδέναι  in  its  root  meaning,  ‘to  see’,  and  connects  ὀρέγονται  (literally:  ‘reach  out
for’) with ‘Sorge’ (‘care’).

3.  This  sentence  has  been  variously  interpreted.  The  most  usual  version  is:  ‘For  thinking  and
being are the same.’ Heidegger, however, goes back to the original meaning of νοεῖν as ‘to perceive
with the eyes’.

The  remarkable  priority  of  ‘seeing’  was  noticed  particularly  by
Augustine, in connection with his Interpretation of concupiscentia.(xii) “Ad

oculos  enim  videre  proprie  pertinet.”  (“Seeing  belongs  properly  to  the
eyes.”)  “Utimur  autem  hoc  verbo  etiam  in  ceteris  sensibus  cum  eos  ad
cognoscendum intendimus.” (“But  we  even  use  this  word  ‘seeing’  for  the
other  senses  when  we  devote  them  to  cognizing.”)  “Neque  enim  dicimus:
audi  quid  rutilet;  aut,  olfac  quam  niteat;  aut,  gusta  quam  splendeat;  aut,
palpa quam fulgeat: videri enim dicuntur haec omnia.” (“For we do not say
‘Hear how it glows’, or ‘Smell how it glistens’, or ‘Taste how it shines’, or
‘Feel  how  it  flashes’;  but  we  say  of  each,  ‘See’;  we  say  that  all  this  is
seen.”) “Dicimus autem non solum, vide quid luceat, quod soli oculi sentire
possunt.” (“We  not  only  say,  ‘See  how  that  shines’,  when  the  eyes  alone
can  perceive  it;”)  “sed  etiam,  vide  quid  sonet;  vide  quid  oleat;  vide  quid
sapiat;  vide  quam  durum  sit;”  (“but  we  even  say,  ‘See  how  that  sounds’,
‘See  how  that  is  scented’,  ‘See  how  that  tastes’,  ‘See  how  hard  that  is’.”)
“Ideoque  generalis  experientia  sensuum  concupiscentia  sicut  dictum  est
oculorum  vocatur,  quia  videndi  officium  in  quo  primatum  oculi  tenent,
etiam  ceteri  sensus  sibi  de  similitudine  usurpant,  cum  aliquid  cognitionis
explorant.”  (“Therefore  the  experience  of  the  senses  in  general  is
designated  as  the  ‘lust  of  the  eyes’;  for  when  the  issue  is  one  of  knowing
something,  the  other  senses,  by  a  certain  resemblance,  take  to  themselves
the function of seeing—a function in which the eyes have priority.”)
 

xii. Augustine, Confessiones, X, 35.

H. 172

 

What is to be said about this tendency just to perceive? Which existential

state of Dasein will become intelligible in the phenomenon of curiosity?

Being-in-the-world is proximally absorbed in the world of concern. This
concern  is  guided  by  circumspection,  which  discovers  the  ready-to-hand
and  preserves  it  as  thus  discovered.  Whenever  we  have  something  to
contribute  or  perform,  circumspection  gives  us  the  route  for  proceeding
with it, the means of carrying it out, the right opportunity, the appropriate
moment.  Concern  may  come  to  rest  in  the  sense  of  one’s  interrupting  the
performance and taking a rest, or it can do so by getting it finished. In rest,
concern does not disappear; circumspection, however, becomes free and is
no longer bound to the world of work. When we take a rest, care subsides
into  circumspection  which  has  been  set  free.  In  the  world  of  work,

circumspective  discovering  has  de-severing  as  the  character  of  its  Being.
When circumspection has been set free, there is no longer anything ready-
to-hand  which  we  must  concern  ourselves  with  bringing  close.  But,  as
essentially  de-severant,  this  circumspection  provides  itself  with  new
possibilities  of  de-severing.  This  means  that  it  tends  away  from  what  is
most  closely  ready-to-hand,  and  into  a  far  and  alien  world.  Care  becomes
concern with the possibilities of seeing the ‘world’ merely as it looks while
one tarries and takes a rest. Dasein seeks what is far away simply in order to
bring it close to itself in the way it looks. Dasein lets itself be carried along
[mitnehmen]  solely  by  the  looks  of  the  world;  in  this  kind  of  Being,  it
concerns itself with becoming rid of itself as Being-in-the-world and rid of
its Being alongside that which, in the closest everyday manner, is ready-to-
hand.

When curiosity has become free, however, it concerns itself with seeing,
not  in  order  to  understand  what  is  seen  (that  is,  to  come  into  a  Being
towards  it)  but  just  in  order  to  see.  It  seeks  novelty  only  in  order  to  leap
from  it  anew  to  another  novelty.  In  this  kind  of  seeing,  that  which  is  an
issue for care does not lie in grasping something and being knowingly in the
truth;  it  lies  rather  in  its  possibilities  of  abandoning  itself  to  the  world.
Therefore  curiosity  is  characterized  by  a  specific  way  of  not  tarrying
alongside  what  is  closest.  Consequently  it  does  not  seek  the  leisure  of
tarrying  observantly,  but  rather  seeks  restlessness  and  the  excitement  of
continual  novelty  and  changing  encounters.  In  not  tarrying,  curiosity  is
concerned with the constant possibility of distraction. Curiosity has nothing
to  do  with  observing  entities  and  marvelling  at  them—θαυμάζειν.  To  be
amazed  to  the  point  of  not  understanding  is  something  in  which  it  has  no
interest. Rather it concerns itself with a kind of knowing, but just in order to
have  known.  Both  this  not  tarrying  in  the  environment  with  which  one
concerns oneself, and this distraction by  new  possibilities, are  constitutive
items  for  curiosity;  and  upon  these  is  founded  the  third  essential
characteristic  of  this  phenomenon,  which  we  call  the  character  of  “never
dwelling  anywhere”  [Aufenthaltslosigkeit].  Curiosity  is  everywhere  and
nowhere. This mode of Being-in-the-world reveals a new kind of Being of
everyday Dasein—a kind in which Dasein is constantly uprooting itself.

H. 173

 

Idle  talk  controls  even  the  ways  in  which  one  may  be  curious.  It  says
what  one  “must”  have  read  and  seen.  In  being  everywhere  and  nowhere,
curiosity is delivered over to idle talk. These two everyday modes of Being
for  discourse  and  sight  are  not  just  present-at-hand  side  by  side  in  their
tendency to uproot, but either of these ways-to-be drags the other one with
it. Curiosity, for which nothing is closed off, and idle talk, for which there is
nothing  that  is  not  understood,  provide  themselves  (that  is,  the  Dasein
which is in this manner [dem so seienden Dasein]) with the guarantee of a
‘life’  which,  supposedly,  is  genuinely  ‘lively’.  But  with  this  supposition  a
third  phenomenon  now  shows  itself,  by  which  the  disclosedness  of
everyday Dasein is characterized.

37. Ambiguity

 

When, in our everyday Being-with-one-another, we encounter the sort of
thing  which  is  accessible  to  everyone,  and  about  which  anyone  can  say
anything,  it  soon  becomes  impossible  to  decide  what  is  disclosed  in  a
genuine  understanding,  and  what  is  not.  This  ambiguity  [Zweideutigkeit]
extends not only to the world, but just as much to Being-with-one-another
as such, and even to Dasein’s Being towards itself.

Everything  looks  as  if  it  were  genuinely  understood,  genuinely  taken
hold  of,  genuinely  spoken,  though  at  bottom  it  is  not;  or  else  it  does  not
look so, and yet at bottom it is. Ambiguity not only affects the way we avail
ourselves  of  what  is  accessible  for  use  and  enjoyment,  and  the  way  we
manage it; ambiguity has already established itself in the understanding as a
potentiality-for-Being,  and  in  the  way  Dasein  projects  itself  and  presents
itself  with  possibilities.(1)  Everyone  is  acquainted  with  what  is  up  for
discussion and what occurs,(2) and everyone discusses it; but everyone also
knows  already  how  to  talk  about  what  has  to  happen  first—about  what  is
not yet up for discussion but ‘really’ must be done.
 

1. ‘…sondern sie hat sich schon im Verstehen als Seinkönnen in der Art des Entwurfs und der

Vorgabe von Möglichkeiten des Daseins festgesetzt.’

2 ‘…was vorliegt und vorkommt...’

Already everyone has surmised and scented out in advance what Others
have  also  surmised  and  scented  out.  This  Being-on-the  scent  is  of  course

based upon hearsay, for if anyone is genuinely ‘on the scent’ of anything, he
does  not  speak  about  it;  and  this  is  the  most  entangling  way  in  which
ambiguity presents Dasein’s possibilities so that they will already be stifled
in their power.(1)

H. 174

 

Even supposing that what “they” have surmised and scented out should
some  day  be  actually  translated  into  deeds,  ambiguity  has  already  taken
care that interest in what has been Realised will promptly die away. Indeed
this  interest  persists,  in  a  kind  of  curiosity  and  idle  talk,  only  so  long  as
there is a possibility of a non-committal just-surmising-with-someone-else.
Being  “in  on  it”  with  someone  [das  Mit-dabei-sein]  when  one  is  on  the
scent, and so long as one is on it, precludes one’s allegiance when what has
been surmised gets carried out. For in such a case Dasein is in every case
forced  back  on  itself.  Idle  talk  and  curiosity  lose  their  power,  and  are
already  exacting  their  penalty.(2)  When  confronted  with  the  carrying-
through of what “they” have surmised together, idle talk readily establishes
that “they” “could have done that too”—for “they” have indeed surmised it
together. In the end, idle talk is even indignant that what it has surmised and
constantly  demanded  now  actually  happens.  In  that  case,  indeed,  the
opportunity to keep on surmising has been snatched away.
 

1. ‘…ist die verfänglichste Weise, in der die Zweideutigkeit Möglichkeiten des Daseins vorgibt,
um sie auch schon in ihrer Kraft zu ersticken.’ (Notice that ‘ihrer’ may refer to ‘Zweideutigkeit’ or to
‘Möglichkeiten’.)

2. ‘Und sie rächen sich auch schon.’

But  when  Dasein  goes  in  for  something  in  the  reticence  of  carrying  it
through  or  even  of  genuinely  breaking  down  on  it,  its  time  is  a  different
time and, as seen by the public, an essentially slower time than that of idle
talk, which ‘lives at a faster rate’. Idle talk will thus long since have gone
on to something else which is currently the very newest thing. That which
was earlier surmise and has now been carried through, has come too late if
one looks at that which is newest. Idle talk and curiosity take care in their
ambiguity to ensure that what is genuinely and newly created is out of date
as  soon  as  it  emerges  before  the  public.  Such  a  new  creation  can  become

free in its positive possibilities only if the idle talk which covers it up has
become ineffective, and if the ‘common’ interest has died away.

In  the  ambiguity  of  the  way  things  have  been  publicly  interpreted,
talking  about  things  ahead  of  the  game  and  making  surmises  about  them
curiously,  gets  passed  off  as  what  is  really  happening,  while  taking  action
and  carrying  something  through  get  stamped  as  something  merely
subsequent and unimportant. Thus Dasein’s understanding in the “they” is
constantly going wrong [versieht sich] in its projects, as regards the genuine
possibilities of Being. Dasein is always ambiguously ‘there’—that is to say,
in  that  public  disclosedness  of  Being-with-one-another  where  the  loudest
idle talk and the most ingenious curiosity keep ‘things moving’, where, in
an everyday manner, everything (and at bottom nothing) is happening.

This ambiguity is always tossing to curiosity that which it seeks; and it

gives idle talk the semblance of having everything decided in it.

H. 175

 

But  this  kind  of  Being  of  the  disclosedness  of  Being-in-the-world
dominates  also  Being-with-one-another  as  such.  The  Other  is  proximally
‘there’  in  terms  of  what  “they”  have  heard  about  him,  what  “they”  say  in
their  talk  about  him,  and  what  “they”  know  about  him.  Into  primordial
Being-with-one-another,  idle  talk  first  slips  itself  in  between.  Everyone
keeps  his  eye  on  the  Other  first  and  next,  watching  how  he  will  comport
himself and what he will say in reply. Being-with-one-another in the “they”
is  by  no  means  an  indifferent  side-by-side-ness  in  which  everything  has
been  settled,  but  rather  an  intent,  ambiguous  watching  of  one  another,  a
secret and reciprocal listening-in. Under the mask of “for-one-another”, an
“against-one-another” is in play.

In  this  connection,  we  must  notice  that  ambiguity  does  not  first  arise
from aiming explicitly at disguise or distortion, and that it is not something
which the individual Dasein first conjures up. It is already implied in Being
with  one  another,  as  thrown Being-with-one-another  in  a  world.  Publicly,
however,  it  is  quite  hidden;  and  “they”  will  always  defend  themselves
against  this  Interpretation  of  the  kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to  the  way
things  have  been  interpreted  by  the  “they”,  lest  it  should  prove  correct.  It
would be a misunderstanding if we were to seek to have the explication of
these phenomena confirmed by looking to the “they” for agreement.

The phenomena of idle talk, curiosity, and ambiguity have been set forth
in such a manner as to indicate that they are already interconnected in their
Being. We must now grasp in an existential-ontological manner the kind of
Being which belongs to this interconnection. The basic kind of Being which
belongs  to  everydayness  is  to  be  understood  within  the  horizon  of  those
structures of Dasein’s Being which have been hitherto obtained.

38. Falling and Thrownness

Idle  talk,  curiosity  and  ambiguity  characterize  the  way  in  which,  in  an
everyday manner, Dasein is its ‘there’—the disclosedness of Being-in-the-
world.  As  definite  existential  characteristics,  these  are  not  present-at-hand
in Dasein, but help to make up its Being. In these, and in the way they are
interconnected in their Being, there is revealed a basic kind of Being which
belongs to everydayness; we call this the “falling”(1) of Dasein.
 

1. ‘Verfallen’. See our note 2, H. 21, and note 1, H. 134 above.

 

 

H. 176

This term does not express any negative evaluation, but is used to signify
that Dasein is proximally and for the most part alongside the ‘world’ of its
concern.  This  “absorption  in...”  [Aufgehen bei...]  has mostly  the  character
of  Being-lost  in  the  publicness  of  the  “they”.  Dasein  has,  in  the  first
instance, fallen away [abgefallen] from itself as an authentic potentiality for
Being  its  Self,  and  has  fallen  into  the  ‘world’.(1)  “Fallenness”  into  the
‘world’  means  an  absorption  in  Being-with-one-another,  in  so  far  as  the
latter  is  guided  by  idle  talk,  curiosity,  and  ambiguity.  Through  the
Interpretation  of  falling,  what  we  have  called  the  “inauthenticity”  of
Dasein(xiii) may now be defined more precisely. On no account, however,
do the terms “inauthentic” and “non-authentic” signify ‘really not’,(2) as if
in  this  mode  of  Being,  Dasein  were  altogether  to  lose  its  Being.
“Inauthenticity” does not mean anything like Being-no-longer-in-the-world,
but  amounts  rather  to  a  quite  distinctive  kind  of  Being-in-the-world—the
kind  which  is  completely  fascinated  by  the  world  and  by  Dasein-with  of
Others in the “they”. Not-Being-its-self [Das Nicht-es-selbst-sein] functions

as  a  positive  possibility  of  that  entity  which,  in  its  essential  concern,  is
absorbed in a world. This kind of not-Being has to be conceived as that kind
of Being which is closest to Dasein and in which Dasein maintains itself for
the most part.

So neither must we take the fallenness of Dasein as a ‘fall’ from a purer
and  higher  ‘primal  status’.  Not  only  do  we  lack  any  experience  of  this
ontically,  but  ontologically  we  lack  any  possibilities  or  clues  for
Interpreting it.

In falling, Dasein itself as factical Being-in-the-world, is something from
which  it  has  already  fallen  away.  And  it  has  not  fallen  into  some  entity
which it comes upon for the first time in the course of its Being, or even one
which it has not come upon at all; it has fallen into the world, which itself
belongs to its Being. Falling is a definite existential characteristic of Dasein
itself. It makes no assertion about Dasein as something present-at-hand, or
about present-at-hand relations to entities from which Dasein ‘is descended’
or  with  which  Dasein  has  subsequently  wound  up  in  some  sort  of
commercium.

We  would  also  misunderstand  the  ontologico-existential  structure  of
falling(3)  if  we  were  to  ascribe  to  it  the  sense  of  a  bad  and  deplorable
ontical property of which, perhaps, more advanced stages of human culture
might be able to rid themselves.
 

xiii. Cf. Section 9, H. 42 ff.

 

1. ‘…und an die “Welt” verfallen.’ While we shall follow English idioms by translating ‘an die
“Welt” ’ as ‘into the “world” ’ in contexts such as this, the preposition ‘into’ is hardly the correct one.
The idea is rather that of falling at the world or collapsing against it.

2. ‘Un- und nichteigentlich, bedeutet aber keineswegs “eigentlich nicht”…’
3.  ‘Die  ontologisch-existenziale  Struktur  des  Verfallens...’  The  words  ‘des  Verfallens’  do  not

appear in the earlier editions.

Neither in our first allusion to Being-in-the-world as Dasein’s basic state,
nor  in  our  characterization  of  its  constitutive  structural  items,  did  we  go
beyond an analysis of the constitution of this kind of Being and take note of
its  character  as  a  phenomenon.  We  have  indeed  described  concern  and
solicitude, as the  possible  basic kinds  of Being-in. But we  did  not  discuss
the question of the everyday kind of Being of these ways in which one may
be. We also showed that Being-in is something quite different from a mere
confrontation, whether by way of observation or by way of action; that is, it

is  not  the  Being-present-at-hand-together  of  a  subject  and  an  Object.
Nevertheless,  it  must  still  have  seemed  that  Being-in-the-world  has  the
function  of  a  rigid  framework,  within  which  Dasein’s  possible  ways  of
comporting  itself  towards  its  world  run  their  course  without  touching  the
‘framework’  itself  as  regards  its  Being.  But  this  supposed  ‘framework’
itself  helps  make  up  the  kind  of  Being  which  is  Dasein’s.  An  existential
mode of Being-in-the-world is documented in the phenomenon of falling.

H. 177

 

Idle talk discloses to Dasein a Being towards its world, towards Others,
and towards itself—a Being in which these are understood, but in a mode of
groundless  floating.  Curiosity  discloses  everything  and  anything,  yet  in
such  a  way  that  Being-in  is  everywhere  and  nowhere.  Ambiguity  hides
nothing  from  Dasein’s  understanding,  but  only  in  order  that  Being-in-the-
world should be suppressed in this uprooted “everywhere and nowhere”.

By  elucidating  ontologically  the  kind  of  Being  belonging  to  everyday
Being-in-the-world as it shows through in these phenomena, we first arrive
at an existentially adequate determination of Dasein’s basic state. Which is
the structure that shows us the ‘movement’ of falling?

Idle talk and the way things have been publicly interpreted (which idle
talk includes) constitute themselves in Being-with-one-another. Idle talk is
not  something  present-at-hand  for  itself  within  the  world,  as  a  product
detached  from  Being-with-one-another.  And  it  is  just  as  far  from  letting
itself  be  volatilized  to  something  ‘universal’  which,  because  it  belongs
essentially  to  nobody,  is  ‘really’  nothing  and  occurs  as  ‘Real’  only  in  the
individual Dasein which speaks. Idle talk is the kind of Being that belongs
to  Being-with-one-another  itself;  it  does  not  first  arise  through  certain
circumstances which have effects upon Dasein ‘from outside’. But if Dasein
itself,  in  idle  talk  and  in  the  way  things  have  been  publicly  interpreted,
presents to itself the possibility of losing itself in the “they” and falling into
groundlessness,  this  tells  us  that  Dasein  prepares  for  itself  a  constant
temptation  towards  falling.  Being-in-the-world  is  in  itself  tempting
[versucherisch].

Since the way in which things have been publicly interpreted has already
become  a  temptation  to  itself  in  this  manner,  it  holds  Dasein  fast  in  its
fallenness.  Idle  talk  and  ambiguity,  having  seen  everything,  having

understood everything, develop the supposition that Dasein’s disclosedness,
which is so available and so prevalent, can guarantee to Dasein that all the
possibilities of its Being will be secure, genuine, and full. Through the self-
certainty and decidedness of the “they”, it gets spread abroad increasingly
that  there  is  no  need  of  authentic  understanding  or  the  state-of-mind  that
goes with it. The supposition of the “they” that one is leading and sustaining
a full and genuine ‘life’, brings Dasein a tranquillity, for  which  everything
is ‘in the best of order’ and all doors are open. Falling Being-in-the-world,
which tempts itself, is at the same time tranquillizing [beruhigend].

H. 178

 

inactivity,  but  drives  one 

However, this tranquillity in inauthentic Being does not seduce one into
stagnation  and 
into  uninhibited  ‘hustle’
[“Betriebs”]. Being-fallen into the ‘world’ does not now somehow come to
rest.  The  tempting  tranquillization  aggravates  the  falling.  With  special
regard  to  the  interpretation  of  Dasein,  the  opinion  may  now  arise  that
understanding  the  most  alien  cultures  and  ‘synthesizing’  them  with  one’s
own  may  lead  to  Dasein’s  becoming  for  the  first  time  thoroughly  and
genuinely  enlightened  about  itself.  Versatile  curiosity  and  restlessly
“knowing it all” masquerade as a universal understanding of Dasein. But at
bottom  it  remains  indefinite  what  is  really  to  be  understood,  and  the
question  has  not  even  been  asked.  Nor  has  it  been  understood  that
understanding itself is a potentiality-for-Being which must be made free in
one’s  ownmost  Dasein  alone.  When  Dasein, 
tranquillized,  and
‘understanding’  everything,  thus  compares  itself  with  everything,  it  drifts
its  ownmost
along 
potentiality-for-Being  is  hidden  from  it.  Falling  Being-in-the-world  is  not
only tempting and tranquillizing; it is at the same time alienating.

towards  an  alienation  [Entfremdung] 

in  which 

Yet  this  alienation  cannot  mean  that  Dasein  gets  factically  torn  away
from  itself.  On  the  contrary,  this  alienation  drives  it  into  a  kind  of  Being
which  borders  on  the  most  exaggerated  ‘self-dissection’,  tempting  itself
with all possibilities of explanation, so that the very ‘characterologies’ and
‘typologies’ which it has brought about(1) are themselves already becoming
something  that  cannot  be  surveyed  at  a  glance.  This  alienation  closes  off
from  Dasein  its  authenticity  and  possibility,  even  if  only  the  possibility  of
genuinely  foundering.  It  does  not,  however,  surrender  Dasein  to  an  entity

which  Dasein  itself  is  not,  but  forces  it  into  its  inauthenticity—into  a
possible kind of Being of itself. The alienation of falling—at once tempting
and  tranquillizing—leads  by  its  own  movement,  to  Dasein’s  getting
entangled [verfängt] in itself.
 

1. ‘...die von ihr gezeitigten...’ We follow the difficilior lectio of the earlier editions. The newer
editions have ‘...die von ihr gezeigten...’ (‘...which it has shown...’). See H. 304 below, and our note
ad loc.

The  phenomena  we  have  pointed  out—temptation,  tranquillizing,
alienation  and  self-entangling  (entanglement)—characterize  the  specific
kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to  falling.  This  ‘movement’  of  Dasein  in  its
own Being, we call its “downward plunge” [Absturz]. Dasein plunges out of
itself  into  itself,  into  the  groundlessness  and  nullity  of  inauthentic
everydayness.  But  this  plunge  remains  hidden  from  Dasein  by  the  way
things  have  been  publicly  interpreted,  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  it  gets
interpreted as a way of ‘ascending’ and ‘living concretely’.

This  downward  plunge  into  and  within  the  groundlessness  of  the
inauthentic Being of the “they”, has a kind of motion which constantly tears
the  understanding  away  from  the  projecting  of  authentic  possibilities,  and
into  the  tranquillized  supposition  that  it  possesses  everything,  or  that
everything  is  within  its  reach.  Since  the  understanding  is  thus  constantly
torn away from authenticity and into the “they” (though always with a sham
of  authenticity),  the  movement  of  falling  is  characterized  by  turbulence
[Wirbel].

H. 179

 

Falling is not only existentially determinative for Being-in-the-world. At
the  same  time  turbulence  makes  manifest  that  the  thrownness  which  can
obtrude  itself  upon  Dasein  in  its  state-of-mind,  has  the  character  of
throwing  and  of  movement.  Thrownness  is  neither  a  ‘fact  that  is  finished’
nor  a  Fact  that  is  settled.(1)  Dasein’s  facticity  is  such  that  as  long  as it  is
what it is, Dasein remains in the throw, and is sucked into the turbulence of
the “they’s” inauthenticity. Thrownness, in which facticity lets itself be seen
phenomenally, belongs to Dasein, for which, in its Being, that very Being is
an issue. Dasein exists factically.
 

1.  ‘Die  Geworfenheit  ist  nicht  nur  nicht  eine  “fertige  Tatsache”,  sondern  auch  nicht  ein

abgeschlossenes Faktum.’

But  now  that  falling  has  been  exhibited,  have  we  not  set  forth  a
phenomenon  which  speaks  directly against the  definition  we  have  used  in
indicating  the  formal  idea  of  existence?  Can  Dasein  be  conceived  as  an
entity  for  which,  in  its  Being,  its  potentiality-for-Being  is  an  issue, if  this
entity, in its very everydayness, has lost itself, and, in falling, ‘lives’ away
from  itself?  But  falling  into  the  world  would  be  phenomenal  ‘evidence’
against  the  existentiality  of  Dasein  only  if  Dasein  were  regarded  as  an
isolated  “I”  or  subject,  as  a  self-point  from  which  it  moves  away.  In  that
case, the world would be an Object. Falling into the world would then have
to be re-Interpreted ontologically as Being-present-at-hand in the manner of
an  entity  within-the-world.  If,  however,  we  keep  in  mind  that  Dasein’s
Being is in the state of Being-in-the-world, as we have already pointed out,
then  it  becomes  manifest  that  falling,  as  a  kind  of  Being  of  this  Being-in,
affords us rather the most elemental evidence for Dasein’s existentiality. In
falling,  nothing  other  than  our  potentiality-for-Being-in  world  is  the  issue,
even if in the mode of inauthenticity. Dasein can fall  only because Being-
in-the-world understandingly with a state-of-mind is an issue for it. On the
other hand, authentic existence is not something which floats above falling
everydayness;  existentially,  it  is  only  a  modified  way  in  which  such
everydayness is seized upon.

The  phenomenon  of  falling  does  not  give  us  something  like  a  ‘night
view’ of Dasein, a property which occurs ontically and may serve to round
out  the  innocuous  aspects  of  this  entity.  Falling  reveals  an  essential
ontological  structure  of  Dasein  itself.  Far  from  determining  its  nocturnal
side, it constitutes all Dasein’s days in their everydayness.

H. 180

 

It follows that our existential-ontological Interpretation makes no ontical
assertion about the ‘corruption of human Nature’, not because the necessary
evidence  is  lacking,  but  because  the  problematic  of  this  Interpretation  is
prior to any assertion about corruption or incorruption. Falling is conceived
ontologically as a kind of motion. Ontically, we have not decided whether
man is ‘drunk with sin’ and in the status corruptionis, whether he walks in

the status integritatis, or whether he finds himself in an intermediate stage,
the status  gratiae.  But  in  so  far  as  any  faith  or  ‘world  view’,  makes  any
such  assertions,  and  if  it  asserts  anything  about  Dasein  as  Being-in-the-
world,  it  must  come  back  to  the  existential  structures  which  we  have  set
forth,  provided  that  its  assertions  are  to  make  a  claim  to  conceptual
understanding.

theme  has  been 

The  leading  question  of  this  chapter  has  been  about  the  Being  of  the
“there”.  Our 
the
disclosedness  which  essentially  belongs  to  Dasein.  The  Being  of  that
disclosedness 
is  constituted  by  states-of-mind,  understanding,  and
discourse. Its everyday kind of Being is characterized by idle talk, curiosity,
and  ambiguity.  These  show  us  the  movement  of  falling,  with  temptation,
tranquillizing, alienation, and entanglement as its essential characteristics.

the  ontological  Constitution  of 

But  with  this  analysis,  the  whole  existential  constitution  of  Dasein  has
been  laid  bare  in  its  principal  features,  and  we  have  obtained  the
phenomenal ground for a ‘comprehensive’ Interpretation of Dasein’s Being
as care.

VI: CARE AS THE BEING OF DASEIN

 

 

 

39.  The  Question  of  the  Primordial  Totality  of  Dasein’s  Structural

Whole
 

H. 181

BEING-IN-THE-WORLD  is  a  structure  which  is  primordially  and
constantly whole. In  the  preceding  chapters  (Division  One,  Chapters  2-5)
this structure has been elucidated phenomenally as a whole, and also in its
constitutive  items,  though  always  on  this  basis.  The  preliminary  glance
which  we  gave  to  the  whole  of  this  phenomenon  in  the  beginning(i)  has
now  lost  the  emptiness  of  our  first  general  sketch  of  it.  To  be  sure,  the
constitution  of  the  structural  whole  and  its  everyday  kind  of  Being,  is
phenomenally  so  manifold  that  it  can  easily  obstruct  our  looking  at  the
whole as such phenomenologically in a way which is unified. But we may
look  at  it more  freely and our unified  view of it may  be held  in  readiness
more  securely  if  we  now  raise  the  question  towards  which  we  have  been
working  in  our  preparatory  fundamental  analysis  of  Dasein  in  general:
“how is the totality of that structural whole which we have pointed out to be
defined in an existential-ontological manner?”
 

i. Cf. Section 12, H. 52 ff.

Dasein  exists  factically.  We  shall  inquire  whether  existentiality  and
facticity have an ontological unity, or whether facticity belongs essentially
to  existentiality.  Because  Dasein  essentially  has  a  state-of-mind  belonging
to  it,  Dasein  has  a  kind  of  Being  in  which  it  is  brought  before  itself  and
becomes disclosed to itself in its thrownness. But thrownness, as a kind of
Being,  belongs  to  an  entity  which  in  each  case  is  its  possibilities,  and  is
them  in  such  a  way  that  it  understands  itself  in  these  possibilities  and  in
terms  of  them,  projecting  itself  upon  them.  Being  alongside  the  ready-to-

hand, belongs just as primordially to Being-in-the-world as does Being-with
Others;  and  Being-in-the-world  is  in  each  case  for  the  sake  of  itself.  The
Self, however, is proximally and for the most part inauthentic, the they-self.
Being-in-the-world  is  always  fallen.  Accordingly  Dasein’s  “average
everydayness”  can  be  defines  as  “Being-in-the-world  which  is  falling  and
disclosed,  thrown  and  projecting,  and  for  which  its  ownmost  potentiality-
for-Being  is  an  issue,  both  in  its  Being  alongside  the  ‘world’  and  in  its
Being-with Others”.

Can  we  succeed  in  grasping  this  structural  whole  of  Dasein’s
everydayness  in  its  totality?  Can  Dasein’s  Being  be  brought  out  in  such  a
unitary  manner  that  in  terms  of  it  the  essential  equiprimordiality  of  the
structures  we  have  pointed  out,  as  well  as  their  existential  possibilities  of
modification,  will  become  intelligible?  Does  our  present  approach  via  the
existential  analytic  provide  us  an  avenue  for  arriving  at  this  Being
phenomenally?

To  put  it  negatively,  it  is  beyond  question  that  the  totality  of  the
structural whole is not to be reached by building it up out of elements. For
this  we  would  need  an  architect’s  plan.  The  Being  of  Dasein,  upon  which
the structural whole as such is ontologically supported, becomes accessible
to us when we look all the way through this whole to a single primordially
unitary  phenomenon  which  is  already  in  this  whole  in  such  a  way  that  it
provides the ontological foundation for each structural item in its structural
possibility. Thus we cannot Interpret this ‘comprehensively’ by a process of
gathering  up  what  we  have  hitherto  gained  and  taking  it  all  together.  The
question of Dasein’s basic existential character is essentially different from
that  of 
the  Being  of  something  present-at-hand.  Our  everyday
environmental  experiencing  [Erfahren],  which  remains  directed  both
ontically and ontologically towards entities within-the-world, is not the sort
of  thing  which  can  present  Dasein  in  an  ontically  primordial  manner  for
ontological  analysis.  Similarly  our  immanent  perception  of  Experiences
[Erlebnissen] fails to provide a clue which is ontologically adequate. On the
other hand, Dasein’s Being is not be to deduced from an idea of man. Does
the Interpretation of Dasein which we have hitherto given permit us to infer
what  Dasein,  from  its  own  standpoint,  demands  as  the  only  appropriate
ontico-ontological way of access to itself?

H. 182

 

An understanding of Being belongs to Dasein’s ontological structure. As
something that  i s  [Seiend], it is disclosed to itself in its Being. The kind of
Being  which  belongs  to  this  disclosedness  is  constituted  by  state-of-mind
and  understanding.  Is  there  in  Dasein  an  understanding  state-of-mind  in
which Dasein has been disclosed to itself in some distinctive way?

If the existential analytic of Dasein is to retain clarity in principle as to
its function in fundamental ontology, then in order to master its provisional
task  of  exhibiting  Dasein’s  Being,  it  must  seek  for  one  of  the  most  far-
reaching  and  most  primordial  possibilities  of  disclosure—one  that  lies  in
Dasein  itself.  The  way  of  disclosure  in  which  Dasein  brings  itself  before
itself  must  be  such  that  in  it  Dasein  becomes  accessible  as  simplified  in  a
certain  manner.  With  what  is  thus  disclosed,  the  structural  totality  of  the
Being we seek must then come to light in an elemental way.

As a state-of-mind which will satisfy these methodological requirements,
the  phenomenon  of  anxiety(1)  will  be  made  basic  for  our  analysis.  In
working  out  this  basic  state-of-mind  characterizing  ontologically  what  is
disclosed in it as such, we shall take the phenomenon of falling as our point
of departure, and distinguish anxiety from the kindred phenomenon of fear,
which we have analysed earlier. As one of Dasein’s possibilities of Being,
anxiety—together  with  Dasein  itself  as  disclosed  in  it—provides  the
phenomenal  basis  for  explicitly  grasping  Dasein’s  primordial  totality  of
Being. Dasein’s Being reveals itself as care. If we are to work out this basic
existential  phenomenon,  we  must  distinguish  it  from  phenomena  which
might be proximally identified with care, such as will, wish, addiction, and
urge.(2)  Care  cannot  be  derived  from  these,  since  they  themselves  are
founded upon it.
 

1.  ‘Angst’.  While  this  word  has  generally  been  translated  as  ‘anxiety’  in  the  post-Freudian
psychological literature, it appears as ‘dread’ in the translations of Kierkegaard and in a number of
discussions of Heidegger. In some ways ‘uneasiness’ or ‘malaise’ would be more appropriate still.

2. ‘...Wille, Wunsch, Hang und Drang.’ For further discussion see H. 194 ff. below.

H. 183

 

Like every ontological analysis, the ontological Interpretation of Dasein
as  care,  with  whatever  we  may  gain  from  such  an  Interpretation,  lies  far
from  what  is  accessible  to  the  pre-ontological  understanding  of  Being  or

even to our ontical acquaintance with entities. It is not surprising that when
the common understanding has regard to that with which it has only ontical
familiarity, that which is known ontologically seems rather strange to it. In
spite of this, even the ontical approach with which we have tried to Interpret
Dasein  ontologically  as  care,  may  appear  farfetched  and  theoretically
contrived,  to  say  nothing  of  the  act  of  violence  one  might  discern  in  our
setting aside the confirmed traditional definition of “man”. Accordingly our
existential  Interpretation  of  Dasein  as  care  requires  pre-ontological
confirmation.  This  lies  in  demonstrating  that  no  sooner  has  Dasein
expressed anything about itself to itself, than it has already interpreted itself
as care (cura), even though it has done so only pre-ontologically.

The analytic of Dasein, which is proceeding towards the phenomenon of
care, is to prepare the way for the problematic of fundamental ontology—
the question of the meaning of Being in general. In order that we may turn
our glance explicitly upon this in the light of what we have gained, and go
beyond  the  special  task  of  an  existentially a  priori anthropology,  we  must
look  back  and  get  a  more  penetrating  grasp  of  the  phenomena  which  are
most  intimately  connected  with  our  leading  question—the  question  of
Being. These phenomena are those very ways of Being which we have been
hitherto explaining: readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand, as attributes of
entities within-the-world whose character is not that of Dasein. Because the
ontological problematic of Being has heretofore been understood primarily
in  the  sense  of  presence-at-hand  (‘Reality’,  ‘world-actuality’),  while  the
nature of Dasein’s Being has remained ontologically undetermined, we need
to discuss the ontological interconnections of care, worldhood, readiness-to-
hand,  and  presence-at-hand  (Reality).  This  will  lead  to  a  more  precise
characterization of the concept of Reality in  the  context  of  a  discussion  of
the epistemological questions oriented by this idea which have been raised
in realism and idealism.

Entities  are,  quite  independently  of  the  experience  by  which  they  are
disclosed, the acquaintance in which they are discovered, and the grasping
in  which  their  nature  is  ascertained.  But  Being  ‘is’  only  in  the
understanding  of  those  entities  to  whose  Being  something  like  an
understanding  of  Being  belongs.  Hence  Being  can  be  something
unconceptualized,  but  it  never  completely  fails  to  be  understood.  In
ontological  problematics  Being  and  truth  have,  from  time  immemorial,
been brought together if not entirely identified. This is evidence that there is

a  necessary  connection  between  Being  and  understanding,  even  if  it  may
perhaps be hidden in its primordial grounds. If we are to give an adequate
preparation  for  the  question  of  Being,  the  phenomenon  of  truth  must  be
ontologically clarified. This will be accomplished in the first instance on the
basis of what we have gained in our foregoing Interpretation, in connection
with the phenomena of disclosedness and discoveredness, interpretation and
assertion.

H. 184

 

Thus our preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein will conclude with
the following themes: the basic state-of-mind of anxiety as a distinctive way
in which Dasein is disclosed (Section 40); Dasein’s Being as care (Section
41); the  confirmation  of  the  existential  Interpretation  of  Dasein  as  care  in
terms  of  Dasein’s  pre-ontological  way  of  interpreting  itself  (Section  42);
Dasein,  worldhood,  and  Reality  (Section  43);  Dasein,  disclosedness,  and
truth (Section 44).

40. The Basic State-of-mind of Anxiety as a Distinctive Way in which

Dasein is Disclosed
 

One of Dasein’s possibilities of Being is to give us ontical ‘information’
about  Dasein  itself  as  an  entity.  Such  information  is  possible  only  in  that
disclosedness  which  belongs  to  Dasein  and  which  is  grounded  in  state-of-
mind  and  understanding.  How  far  is  anxiety  a  state-of-mind  which  is
distinctive?  How  is  it  that  in  anxiety  Dasein  gets  brought  before  itself
through  its  own  Being,  so  that  we  can  define  phenomenologically  the
character  of  the  entity  disclosed  in  anxiety,  and  define  it  as  such  in  its
Being, or make adequate preparations for doing so?

Since  our  aim  is  to  proceed  towards  the  Being  of  the  totality  of  the
structural  whole,  we  shall  take  as  our  point  of  departure  the  concrete
analyses of falling which we have just carried through. Dasein’s absorption
in the “they” and its absorption in the ‘world’ of its concern, make manifest
something  like  a  fleeing  of  Dasein  in  the  face  of  itself—of  itself  as  an
authentic  potentiality-for-Being-its-Self.(1)  This  phenomenon  of  Dasein’s
fleeing in the face of itself and in the face of its authenticity, seems at least a

suitable phenomenal basis for the following investigation. But to bring itself
face  to  face  with  itself, is  precisely what Dasein does not do  when  it thus
flees. It turns away from itself in accordance with its ownmost inertia [Zug]
of  falling.  In  investigating  such  phenomena,  however,  we  must  be  careful
not 
to  confuse  ontico-existentiell  characterization  with  ontologico-
existential  Interpretation  nor  may  we  overlook  the  positive  phenomenal
bases provided for this Interpretation by such a characterization.

H. 185

 

From  an  existentiell  point  of  view,  the  authenticity  of  Being-one’s-Self
has  of  course  been  closed  off  and  thrust  aside  in  falling;  but  to  be  thus
closed off is merely the privation of a disclosedness which manifests itself
phenomenally  in  the  fact  that  Dasein’s  fleeing  is  a  fleeing  in  the  face  of
itself.  That  in  the  face  of  which  Dasein  flees,  is  precisely  what  Dasein
comes  up  ‘behind’.(2)  Only  to  the  extent  that  Dasein  has  been  brought
before  itself  in  an  ontologically  essential  manner  through  whatever
disclosedness belongs to it, can it flee in the face of that in the face of which
it flees. To be sure, that in the face of which it flees is not grasped in  thus
turning  away  [Abkehr]  in  falling;  nor  is  it  experienced  even  in  turning
thither  [Hinkehr].  Rather,  in  turning  away  from  it,  it  is  disclosed  ‘there’.
This  existentiell-ontical  turning-away,  by  reason  of  its  character  as  a
disclosure,  makes 
to  grasp  existential-
ontologically that in the face of which Dasein flees, and to grasp it as such.
Within the ontical ‘away-from’ which such turning-away implies, that in the
face  of  which  Dasein  flees  can  be  understood  and  conceptualized  by
‘turning thither’ in a way which is phenomenologically Interpretative.
 

it  phenomenally  possible 

1. ‘…offenbart so etwas wie eine Flucht des Daseins vor ihm selbst als eigentlichem Selbst-sein-
können.’ The point of this paragraph is that if we are to study the totality of Dasein, Dasein must be
brought  ‘before  itself’  or  ‘face  to  face  with  itself’  (‘vor  es  selbst’);  and  the  fact  that  Dasein  flees
‘from itself’  or  ‘in  the  face  of  itself’  (‘vor ihm selbst’), which  may  seem  at  first  to  lead  us  off  the
track, is actually very germane to our inquiry.

2. ‘Im Wovor der Flucht kommt das Dasein gerade “hinter” ihm her.’

So in orienting our analysis by the phenomenon of falling, we are not in
principle  condemned  to  be  without  any  prospect  of  learning  something
ontologically  about  the  Dasein  disclosed  in  that  phenomenon.  On  the

contrary,  here,  least  of  all,  has  our  Interpretation  been  surrendered  to  an
artificial  way  in  which  Dasein  grasps  itself;  it  merely  carries  out  the
explication  of  what  Dasein  itself  ontically  discloses.  The  possibility  of
proceeding towards Dasein’s Being by going along with it and following it
up  [Mit-  und  Nachgehen]  Interpretatively  with  an  understanding  and  the
state-of-mind  that  goes  with  it,  is  the  greater,  the  more  primordial  is  that
phenomenon  which  functions  methodologically  as  a  disclosive  state-of-
mind. It might be contended that anxiety performs some such functions.

We are not entirely unprepared for the analysis of anxiety. Of course it
still  remains  obscure  how  this  is  connected  ontologically  with  fear.
Obviously these are kindred phenomena. This is betokened by the fact that
for  the  most  part  they  have  not  been  distinguished  from  one  another:  that
which  is  fear,  gets  designated  as  “anxiety”,  while  that  which  has  the
character of anxiety, gets called “fear”. We shall try to proceed towards the
phenomenon of anxiety step by step.

Dasein’s falling into the “they” and the ‘world’ of its concern, is what we
have called a ‘fleeing’ in the face of itself. But one is not necessarily fleeing
whenever one shrinks back in the face of something or turns away from it.
Shrinking back in the face of what fear discloses—in the face of something
threatening—is  founded  upon  fear;  and  this  shrinking  back  has  the
character of fleeing. Our Interpretation of fear as a state-of-mind has shown
that  in  each  case  that  in  the  face  of  which  we  fear  is  a  detrimental  entity
within-the-world  which  comes  from  some  definite  region  but  is  close  by
and is bringing itself close, and yet might stay away. In falling, Dasein turns
away from  i t s e l f. That in the face of which it thus shrinks back must, in
any case, be an entity with the character of threatening; yet this entity has
the same kind of Being as the one that shrinks back: it is Dasein itself. That
in  the  face  of  which  it  thus  shrinks  back  cannot  be  taken  as  something
‘fearsome’,  for  anything  ‘fearsome’  is  always  encountered  as  an  entity
within-the-world. The only threatening which can be ‘fearsome’ and which
gets discovered in fear, always comes from entities within-the-world.

H. 186

 

Thus the turning-away of falling is not a fleeing that is founded upon a
fear  of  entities  within-the-world.  Fleeing  that  is  so  grounded  is  still  less  a
character  of  this  turning-away,  when  what  this  turning-away  does  is

precisely  to  turn  thither  towards  entities  within-the-world  by  absorbing
itself  in  them.  The  turning-away  of  falling  is  grounded  rather  in  anxiety,
which in turn is what first makes fear possible.

To  understand  this  talk  about  Dasein’s  fleeing  in  the  face  of  itself  in
falling,  we  must  recall  that  Being-in-the-world  is  a  basic  state  of  Dasein.
That in the face of which one has anxiety [das Wovor der Angst] is Being-
in-the-world  as  such.  What  is  different  phenomenally  between  that  in  the
face of which anxiety is anxious [sich ängstet] and that in the face of which
fear  is  afraid?  That  in  the  face  of  which  one  has  anxiety  is  not  an  entity
within-the-world. Thus it is essentially incapable of having an involvement.
This  threatening  does  not  have  the  character  of  a  definite  detrimentality
which reaches what is threatened, and which reaches it with definite regard
to a special factical potentiality-for-Being. That in the face of which one is
anxious  is  completely  indefinite.  Not  only  does  this  indefiniteness  leave
factically undecided which entity within-the-world is threatening us, but it
also tells us that entities within-the-world are not ‘relevant’ at all. Nothing
which is ready-to-hand or present-at-hand within the world functions as that
in the face of which anxiety is anxious. Here the totality of involvements of
the  ready-to-hand  and  the  present-at-hand  discovered  within-the-world,  is,
as  such,  of  no  consequence;  it  collapses  into  itself;  the  world  has  the
character  of  completely  lacking  significance.  In  anxiety  one  does  not
encounter  this  thing  or  that  thing  which,  as  something  threatening,  must
have an involvement.

Accordingly,  when  something  threatening  brings  itself  close,  anxiety
does not ‘see’ any definite ‘here’ or ‘yonder’ from which it comes. That in
the  face  of  which  one  has  anxiety  is  characterized  by  the  fact  that  what
threatens  is  nowhere.  Anxiety  ‘does  not  know’  what  that  in  the  face  of
which it is anxious is. ‘Nowhere’, however, does not signify nothing: this is
where any region lies, and there too lies any disclosedness of the world for
essentially  spatial  Being-in.  Therefore  that  which  threatens  cannot  bring
itself  close  from  a  definite  direction  within  what  is  close  by;  it  is  already
‘there’, and yet nowhere; it is so close that it is oppressive and stifles one’s
breath, and yet it is nowhere.

H. 187

 

In  that  in  the  face  of  which  one  has  anxiety,  the  ‘It  is  nothing  and
nowhere’  becomes  manifest.  The  obstinacy  of  the  “nothing  and  nowhere
within-the-world” means as a phenomenon that the world as such is that in
the  face  of  which  one  has  anxiety.  The  utter  insignificance  which  makes
itself known in the “nothing and nowhere”, does not signify that the world
is  absent,  but  tells  us  that  entities  within-the-world  are  of  so  little
importance in themselves that on the basis of this insignificance of what is
within-the-world, the world in its worldhood is all that still obtrudes itself.

What  oppresses  us  is  not  this  or  that,  nor  is  it  the  summation  of
everything  present-at-hand; it is  rather the possibility  of  the  ready-to-hand
in general; that is to say, it is the world itself. When anxiety has subsided,
then in our everyday way of talking we are accustomed to say that ‘it was
really nothing’. And what it was, indeed, does get reached ontically by such
a way of talking. Everyday discourse tends towards concerning itself with
the ready-to-hand and talking about it. That in the face of which anxiety is
anxious is nothing ready-to-hand within-the-world. But this “nothing ready-
to-hand”, which only our everyday circumspective discourse understands, is
not  totally  nothing.(1)  The  “nothing”  of  readiness-to-hand  is  grounded  in
the most primordial ‘something’—in the world. Ontologically, however, the
world belongs essentially to Dasein’s Being as Being-in-the-world. So if the
“nothing”—that is, the world as such—exhibits itself as that in the face of
which  one  has  anxiety,  this  means  that  Being-in-the-world  itself  is  that  in
the face of which anxiety is anxious.

Being-anxious discloses, primordially and directly, the world as world. It
is not the case, say, that the world first gets thought of by deliberating about
it, just by itself, without regard for the entities within-the-world, and that, in
the face of this world, anxiety then arises; what is rather the case is that the
world  as  world  is  disclosed  first  and  foremost  by  anxiety,  as  a  mode  of
state-of-mind. This does not signify, however, that in anxiety the worldhood
of the world gets conceptualized.

Anxiety is not only anxiety in the face of something, but, as a state-of-
mind, it is also anxiety about something. That which anxiety is profoundly
anxious [sich äbangstet] about is not a definite kind of Being for Dasein or a
definite possibility for it. Indeed the threat itself is indefinite, and therefore
cannot penetrate threateningly to this or that factically concrete potentiality-
for-Being. That which anxiety is anxious about is Being-in-the world itself.
In  anxiety  what  is  environmentally  ready-to-hand  sinks  away,  and  so,  in

general,  do  entities  within-the-world.  The  ‘world’  can  offer  nothing  more,
and  neither  can  the  Dasein-with  of  Others.  Anxiety  thus  takes  away  from
Dasein  the  possibility  of  understanding  itself,  as  it  falls,  in  terms  of  the
‘world’ and the way things have been publicly interpreted. Anxiety throws
Dasein back upon that which it is anxious about—its authentic potentiality-
for-Being-in-the-world.  Anxiety  individualizes  Dasein  for  its  ownmost
Being-in-the-world,  which  as  something  that  understands,  projects  itself
essentially upon possibilities. Therefore, with that which it is anxious about,
anxiety discloses Dasein as Being-possible, and indeed as the only kind of
thing  which  it  can  be  of  its  own  accord  as  something  individualized  in
individualization [vereinzeltes in der Vereinzelung].

H. 188

 

Anxiety  makes  manifest  in  Dasein  its  Being  towards  its  ownmost
potentiality-for-Being—that  is,  its  Being-free for  the  freedom  of  choosing
itself and taking hold of itself. Anxiety brings Dasein face to face with its
Being-free  for  (propensio  in...)  the  authenticity  of  its  Being,  and  for  this
authenticity as a possibility which it always is.(2) But at the same time, this
is the Being to which Dasein as Being-in-the-world has been delivered over.
 

1. ‘Allein dieses Nichts von Zuhandenem, das die alltägliche umsichtige Rede einzig versteht, ist

kein totales Nichts.’ This sentence is grammatically ambiguous.

2. ‘Die Angst bringt das Dasein vor sein Freisein für... (propensio in...) die Eigentlichkeit seines

Seins als Möglichkeit, die es immer schon ist.’

That about  which anxiety  is  anxious reveals itself as that in  the  face  of
which it is anxious—namely, Being-in-the-world. The selfsameness of that
in the face of which and that about which one has anxiety, extends even to
anxiousness  [Sichängsten]  itself.  For,  as  a  state-of-mind,  anxiousness  is  a
basic kind of Being-in-the-world. Here the disclosure and the disclosed are
existentially  selfsame  in  such  a  way  that  in  the  latter  the  world  has  been
disclosed  as  world,  and  Being-in  has  been  disclosed  as  a  potentiality-for-
Being  which  is  individualized,  pure,  and  thrown;  this  makes  it  plain  that
with  the  phenomenon  of  anxiety  a  distinctive  state-of-mind  has  become  a
theme for Interpretation. Anxiety individualizes Dasein and thus discloses it
as  ‘solus  ipse’.  But  this  existential  ‘solipsism’  is  so  far  from  the
displacement  of  putting  an  isolated  subject-Thing  into  the  innocuous

emptiness of a worldless occurring, that in an extreme sense what it does is
precisely  to  bring  Dasein  face  to  face  with  its  world  as  world,  and  thus
bring it face to face with itself as Being-in-the-world.

H. 189

 

 

Again  everyday  discourse  and  the  everyday  interpretation  of  Dasein
furnish our most unbiased evidence that anxiety as a basic state-of-mind is
disclosive in the manner we have shown. As we have said earlier, a state-of-
mind makes manifest ‘how one is’. In anxiety one feels ‘uncanny’.(1) Here
the  peculiar  indefiniteness  of  that  which  Dasein  finds  itself  alongside  in
anxiety,  comes  proximally  to  expression:  the  “nothing  and  nowhere”.  But
here  “uncanniness”  also  means  “not-being-at-home”  [das  Nicht-zuhause-
sein]. In our first indication of the phenomenal character of Dasein’s basic
state  and  in  our  clarification  of  the  existential  meaning  of  “Being-in”  as
distinguished from the categorial signification of ‘insideness’, Being-in was
defined  as  “residing  alongside...”,  “Being-familiar  with…”(ii)  This
character of Being-in was then brought to view more concretely through the
everyday publicness of the “they”, which brings tranquillized self-assurance
—‘Being-at-home’,  with 
average
everydayness  of  Dasein.(iii)  On  the  other  hand,  as  Dasein  falls,  anxiety
brings  it  back  from  its  absorption  in  the  ‘world’.  Everyday  familiarity
collapses.  Dasein  has  been  individualized,  but  individualized  as Being-in-
the-world. Being-in enters into the existential ‘mode’ of the “not-at-home”.
Nothing else is meant by our talk about ‘uncanniness’.
 

its  obviousness—into 

the 

all 

ii. Cf. Section 12, H. 53 ff.
iii. Cf. Section 27, H. 126 ff.

1.  ‘Befindlichkeit,  so  wurde  früher  gesagt,  macht  offenbar,  “wie  einem  ist”.  In  der  Angst  ist
einem  “unheimlich”.’  The  reference  is  presumably  to  H.  134  above.  While  ‘unheimlich’  is  here
translated as ‘uncanny’, it means more literally ‘unhomelike’, as the author proceeds to point out.

By this time we can see phenomenally what falling, as fleeing, flees in
the face of. It does not flee in the face of entities within-the-world; these are
precisely  what  it  flees  towards—as  entities  alongside  which  our  concern,
lost in the “they”, can dwell in tranquillized familiarity. When in falling we
flee  into  the  “at-home”  of  publicness,  we  flee  in  the  face  of  the  “not-at-

home”; that is, we flee in the face of the uncanniness which lies in Dasein—
in Dasein as thrown Being-in-the-world, which has been delivered over to
itself  in  its  Being.  This  uncanniness  pursues  Dasein  constantly,  and  is  a
threat  to  its  everyday  lostness  in  the  “they”,  though  not  explicitly.  This
threat  can  go  together  factically  with  complete  assurance  and  self-
sufficiency  in  one’s  everyday  concern.  Anxiety  can  arise  in  the  most
innocuous Situations. Nor does it have any need for darkness, in which it is
commonly easier for one to feel uncanny. In the dark there is emphatically
‘nothing’  to  see,  though  the  very  world  itself  is  still  ‘there’,  and  ‘there’
more obtrusively.

If  we  Interpret  Dasein’s  uncanniness  from  an  existential-ontological
point of view as a threat which reaches Dasein itself and which comes from
Dasein itself, we are not contending that in factical anxiety too it has always
been understood in this sense. When Dasein “understands” uncanniness in
the everyday manner, it does so by turning away from it in falling; in this
turning-away, the “not-at-home” gets ‘dimmed down’. Yet the everydayness
of  this  fleeing  shows  phenomenally  that  anxiety,  as  a  basic  state-of-mind,
belongs to Dasein’s essential state of Being-in-the-world, which, as one that
is  existential,  is  never  present-at-hand  but  is  itself  always  in  a  mode  of
factical  Being-there(1)—that is,  in  the  mode  of a state-of-mind.  That  kind
of  Being-in-the-world  which  is  tranquillized  and  familiar  is  a  mode  of
Dasein’s uncanniness, not the reverse. From an existential-ontological point
of  view,  the  “not-at-home”  must  be  conceived  as  the  more  primordial
phenomenon.
 

1.  Here  we  follow  the  earlier  editions  in  reading  ‘Da-seins’.  In  the  later  editions  the  hyphen

appears ambiguously at the end of a line.

And  only  because  anxiety  is  always  latent  in  Being-in-the-world,  can
such  Being-in-the-world,  as  Being  which  is  alongside  the  ‘world’  and
which  is  concernful  in  its  state-of-mind,  ever  be  afraid.  Fear  is  anxiety,
fallen into the ‘world’, inauthentic, and, as such, hidden from itself.

H. 190

 

After  all,  the  mood  of  uncanniness  remains,  factically,  something  for
which  we  mostly  have  no  existentiell  understanding.  Moreover,  under  the

ascendancy of falling and publicness, ‘real’ anxiety is rare. Anxiety is often
conditioned  by  ‘physiological’  factors.  This  fact,  in  its  facticity,  is  a
problem ontologically, not  merely  with  regard  to  its  ontical  causation  and
course of development. Only because Dasein is anxious in the very depths
of  its  Being,  does  it  become  possible  for  anxiety  to  be  elicited
physiologically.

Even  rarer  than  the  existentiell  Fact  of  “real”  anxiety  are  attempts  to
Interpret  this  phenomenon  according  to  the  principles  of  its  existential-
ontological Constitution and function. The reasons for this lie partly in the
general neglect of the existential analytic of Dasein, but more particularly in
a failure to recognize the phenomenon of state-of-mind(iv). Yet the factical
rarity  of  anxiety  as  a  phenomenon  cannot  deprive  it  of  its  fitness  to  take
over a methodological function in principle for the existential analytic. On
the  contrary,  the  rarity  of  the  phenomenon  is  an  index  that  Dasein,  which
for the most part remains concealed from itself in its authenticity because of
the  way  in  which  things  have  been  publicly  interpreted  by  the  “they”,
becomes disclosable in a primordial sense in this basic state-of-mind.
 

iv. It is no accident that the phenomena of anxiety and fear, which have never been distinguished
in a thoroughgoing manner, have come within the purview of Christian theology ontically and even
(though  within  very  narrow  limits)  ontologically.  This  has  happened  whenever  the  anthropological
problem  of  man’s  Being  towards  God  has  won  priority  and  when  questions  have  been  formulated
under the guidance of phenomena like faith, sin, love, and repentance. Cf. Augustine’s doctrine of the
timor  castus  and  servilis,  which  is  discussed  in  his  exegetical  writings  and  his  letters.  On  fear  in
general cf. his De diversis quaestionibus octoginta tribus, qu. 33 (de metu); qu. 34 (utrum non aliud
amandum sit, quam metu carere); qu. 35 (quid amandum sit). (Migne, Patrologiae Latinae tom. VII,
pp. 23 ff.)

Luther has treated the problem of fear not only in the traditional context of an Interpretation of
poenitentia  and  contritio,  but  also  in  his  commentary  on  the  Book  of  Genesis,  where,  though  his
treatment  is  by  no  means  highly  conceptualized,  it  is  all  the  more  impressive  as  edification.  Cf.
Enarrationes in genesin, cap. 3, Werke (Erlanger Ausgabe), Exegetica opera latina, tom. 1, pp. 177
ff.

The  man  who  has  gone  farthest  in  analysing  the  phenomenon  of  anxiety—and  again  in  the
theological  context  of  a  ‘psychological’  exposition  of  the  problem  of  original  sin—is  Søren
Kierkegaard.  Cf.  Der  Begriff  der  Angst  [The  Concept  of  Dread],  1844,  Gesammelte  Werke
(Diederichs), vol. 5.

H. 191

 

Of course it is essential to every state-of-mind that in each case Being-
in-the-world  should  be  fully  disclosed  in  all  those  items  which  are
constitutive  for  it—world,  Being-in,  Self.  But  in  anxiety  there  lies  the

is  quite  distinctive;  for  anxiety
possibility  of  a  disclosure  which 
individualizes.  This  individualization  brings  Dasein  back  from  its  falling,
and makes manifest to it that authenticity and inauthenticity are possibilities
of its Being. These basic possibilities of Dasein (and Dasein is in each case
mine)  show  themselves  in  anxiety  as they  are  in  themselves—undisguised
by  entities  within-the-world,  to  which,  proximally  and  for  the  most  part,
Dasein clings.

How  far  has  this  existential  Interpretation  of  anxiety  arrived  at  a
phenomenal  basis  for  answering  the  guiding  question  of  the  Being  of  the
totality of Dasein’s structural whole?

41. Dasein’s Being as Care

 

Since  our  aim  is  to  grasp  the  totality  of  this  structural  whole
ontologically,  we  must  first  ask  whether  the  phenomenon  of  anxiety  and
that which is disclosed in it, can give us the whole of Dasein in a way which
is  phenomenally  equiprimordial,  and  whether  they  can  do  so  in  such  a
manner  that  if  we  look  searchingly  at  this  totality,  our  view  of  it  will  be
filled  in  by  what  has  thus  been  given  us.  The  entire  stock  of  what  lies
therein may be counted up formally and recorded: anxiousness as a state-of-
mind  is  a  way  of  Being-in-the-world;  that  in  the  face  of  which  we  have
anxiety is thrown Being-in-the-world; that which we have anxiety about is
our  potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world.  Thus  the  entire  phenomenon  of
anxiety  shows  Dasein  as  factically  existing  Being-in-the-world.  The
fundamental  ontological  characteristics  of  this  entity  are  existentiality,
facticity,  and  Being-fallen.  These  existential  characteristics  are  not  pieces
belonging  to  something  composite,  one  of  which  might  sometimes  be
missing;  but  there  is  woven  together  in  them  a  primordial  context  which
makes up that totality of the structural whole which we are seeking. In the
unity of those characteristics of Dasein’s Being which we have mentioned,
this Being becomes something which it is possible for us to grasp as such
ontologically. How is this unity itself to be characterized?

Dasein  is  an  entity  for  which,  in  its  Being,  that  Being  is  an  issue.  The
phrase  ‘is  an  issue’  has  been  made  plain  in  the  state-of-Being  of
understanding—of  understanding  as  self-projective  Being  towards  its
ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.  This  potentiality  is  that  for  the  sake  of

which  any  Dasein  is  as  it  is.  In  each  case  Dasein  has  already  compared
itself, in its Being, with a possibility of itself. Being-free for one’s ownmost
potentiality-for-Being, and therewith for the possibility of authenticity and
inauthenticity,  is  shown,  with  a  primordial,  elemental  concreteness,  in
anxiety.  But  ontologically,  Being  towards  one’s  ownmost  potentiality-for-
Being  means  that  in  each  case  Dasein  is  already  ahead  of  itself  [ihm
selbst… vorweg] in its Being. Dasein is always ‘beyond itself’ [“über sich
hinaus”], not as a way of behaving towards other entities which it is not, but
as Being towards the potentiality-for-Being which it is itself. This structure
of  Being,  which  belongs  to  the  essential  ‘is  an  issue’,  we  shall  denote  as
Dasein’s “Being-ahead-of-itself”.

H. 192

 

But this structure pertains to the whole of Dasein’s constitution. “Being-
ahead-of-itself”  does  not  signify  anything  like  an  isolated  tendency  in  a
worldless ‘subject’, but characterizes Being-in-the-world. To Being-in-the-
world, however, belongs the fact that it has been delivered over to itself—
that it has in each case already been thrown into a world. The abandonment
of  Dasein  to  itself  is  shown  with  primordial  concreteness  in  anxiety.
“Being-ahead-of-itself”  means,  if  we  grasp  it more  fully,  “ahead-of-itself-
in-already-being-in-a-world”. As soon as this essentially unitary structure is
seen  as  a  phenomenon,  what  we  have  set  forth  earlier  in  our  analysis  of
worldhood  also  becomes  plain.  The  upshot  of  that  analysis  was  that  the
referential  totality  of  significance  (which  as  such  is  constitutive  for
worldhood) has been ‘tied up’ with a “for-the-sake-of-which”. The fact that
this referential totality of the manifold relations of the ‘in-order-to’ has been
bound  up  with  that  which  is  an  issue  for  Dasein,  does  not  signify  that  a
‘world’ of Objects which is present-at-hand has been welded together with
a  subject.  It  is  rather  the  phenomenal  expression  of  the  fact  that  the
constitution  of  Dasein,  whose  totality  is  now  brought  out  explicitly  as
ahead-of-itself-in-Being-already-in…,  is  primordially  a  whole.  To  put  it
otherwise,  existing 
is  essentially
determined by facticity.

is  always  factical.  Existentiality 

Furthermore, Dasein’s factical existing is not only generally and without
further  differentiation  a  thrown  potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world;  it  is
always  also  absorbed  in  the  world  of  its  concern.  In  this  falling  Being-

alongside…,  fleeing  in  the  face  of  uncanniness  (which  for  the  most  part
remains  concealed  with  latent  anxiety,  since  the  publicness  of  the  “they”
suppresses  everything  unfamiliar),  announces  itself,  whether  it  does  so
explicitly or not, and whether it is understood or not. Ahead-of-itself-Being-
already-in-a-world  essentially  includes  one’s  falling  and  one’s  Being
alongside  those  things  ready-to-hand  within-the-world  with  which  one
concerns oneself.

The formally existential totality of Dasein’s ontological structural whole
must  therefore  be  grasped  in  the  following  structure:  the  Being  of  Dasein
means  ahead-of-itself-Being-already-in-(the-world)  as  Being-alongside
(entities encountered within-the-world). This Being fills in the signification
of the term “care” [Sorge], which is used in a purely ontologico-existential
manner. From this signification every tendency of Being which one might
have  in  mind  ontically,  such  as  worry  [Besorgnis]  or  carefreeness
[Sorglosigkeit], is ruled out.

H. 193

 

Because  Being-in-the-world  is  essentially  care,  Being-alongside  the
ready-to-hand  could  be  taken  in  our  previous  analyses  as  concern,  and
Being with the Dasein-with of Others as we encounter it within-the-world
could  be  taken  as  solicitude.(1)  Being-alongside  something  is  concern,
because it is defined as a way of Being-in by its basic structure—care. Care
does not characterize just existentiality, let us say, as detached from facticity
and  falling;  on  the  contrary,  it  embraces  the  unity  of  these  ways  in  which
Being  may  be  characterized.  So  neither  does  “care”  stand  primarily  and
exclusively for an isolated attitude of the “I” towards itself. If one were to
construct  the  expression  ‘care  for  oneself’  [“Selbst-sorge”],  following  the
analogy of “concern” [Besorgen] and “solicitude” [Fürsorge], this would be
a tautology. “Care” cannot stand for some special attitude towards the Self;
for the Self has already been characterized ontologically by “Being-ahead-
of-itself”,  a  characteristic  in  which  the  other  two  items  in  the  structure  of
care—Being-already-in…  and  Being-alongside…—have  been  posited  as
well [mitgesetzt].
 

1. Cf. H. 121 and 131 above.

In Being-ahead-of-oneself as Being towards one’s ownmost potentiality-
for-Being,  lies  the  existential-ontological  condition  for  the  possibility  of
Being-free  for  authentic  existentiell  possibilities.  For  the  sake  of  its
potentiality-for-Being, any Dasein is as it factically is. But to the extent that
this  Being  towards  its  potentiality-for-Being  is  itself  characterized  by
freedom,  Dasein  can  comport  itself  towards  its  possibilities,  even
unwillingly;  it  can  be  inauthentically;  and  factically  it  is  inauthentically,
proximally and for the most part. The authentic “for-the-sake-of-which” has
not  been  taken  hold  of;  the  projection  of  one’s  own  potentiality-for-Being
has been abandoned to the disposal of the “they”. Thus when we speak of
“Being-ahead-of-itself”, the ‘itself’ which we have in mind is in each case
the Self in the sense of the they-self. Even in inauthenticity Dasein remains
essentially ahead of itself, just as Dasein’s fleeing in the face of itself as it
falls,  still  shows  that  it  has  the  state-of-Being  of  an  entity  for  which  its
Being is an issue.

Care,  as  a  primordial  structural  totality,  lies  ‘before’  [“vor”]  every
factical  ‘attitude’  and  ‘situation’  of  Dasein,  and  it  does  so  existentially  a
priori; this  means  that  it  always  lies  in them.  So  this  phenomenon  by  no
means  expresses  a  priority  of  the  ‘practical’  attitude  over  the  theoretical.
When we ascertain something present-at-hand by merely beholding it, this
activity has the character of care just as much as does a ‘political action’ or
taking a rest and enjoying oneself. ‘Theory’ and ‘practice’ are possibilities
of Being for an entity whose Being must be defined as “care”.

H. 194

 

The  phenomenon  of  care  in  its  totality  is  essentially  something  that
cannot  be  torn  asunder;  so  any  attempts  to  trace  it  back  to  special  acts  or
drives like willing and wishing or urge and addiction,(1) or to construct it
out of these, will be unsuccessful.
 

1.  ‘…besondere  Akte  oder  Triebe  wie  Wollen  und  Wünschen  oder  Drang  und  Hang...’  Cf.  H.

182.

Willing  and  wishing  are  rooted  with  ontological  necessity  in  Dasein  as
care; they are not just ontologically undifferentiated Experiences occurring
in a ‘stream’ which is completely indefinite with regard to the meaning of

its  Being.  This  is  no  less  the  case  with  urge  and  addiction.  These  too  are
grounded in care so far as they can be exhibited in Dasein at all. This does
not prevent them from being ontologically constitutive even for entities that
merely ‘live’. But the basic ontological state of ‘living’ is a problem in its
own  right  and  can  be  tackled  only  reductively  and  privatively  in  terms  of
the ontology of Dasein.

Care  is  ontologically  ‘earlier’  than  the  phenomena  we  have  just
mentioned,  which  admittedly  can,  within  certain  limits,  always  be
‘described’  appropriately  without  our  needing  to  have  the  full  ontological
horizon visible, or even to be familiar with it at all. From the standpoint of
our present investigation in fundamental ontology, which aspires neither to
a  thematically  complete  ontology  of  Dasein  nor  even  to  a  concrete
anthropology, it must suffice to suggest how these phenomena are grounded
existentially in care.

That  very  potentiality-for-Being  for  the  sake  of  which  Dasein  is,  has
Being-in-the-world  as  its  kind  of  Being.  Thus  it  implies  ontologically  a
relation to entities within-the-world. Care is always concern and solicitude,
even if only privatively. In willing, an entity which is understood—that is,
one which has been projected upon its possibility—gets seized upon, either
as something with which one may concern oneself, or as something which
is  to  be  brought  into  its  Being  through  solicitude.  Hence,  to  any  willing
there  belongs  something  willed,  which  has  already  made  itself  definite  in
terms of a “for-the-sake-of-which”. If willing is to be possible ontologically,
the following items are constitutive for it: (1) the prior disclosedness of the
“for-the-sake-of-which” 
the
disclosedness of something with which one can concern oneself (the world
as  the  “wherein”  of  Being-already);(1)  (3)  Dasein’s  projection  of  itself
understandingly  upon  a  potentiality-for-Being  towards  a  possibility  of  the
entity ‘willed’. In the phenomenon of willing, the underlying totality of care
shows through.
 

(Being-ahead-of-itself); 

in  general 

(2) 

1. ‘…(Welt als das Worin des Schon-seins)…’

H. 195

 

As something factical, Dasein’s projection of itself understandingly is in
each  case  already  alongside  a  world  that  has  been  discovered.  From  this

world  it  takes  its  possibilities,  and  it  does  so  first  in  accordance  with  the
way  things  have  been  interpreted  by  the  “they”.  This  interpretation  has
already  restricted  the  possible  options  of  choice  to  what  lies  within  the
range  of  the  familiar,  the  attainable,  the  respectable—that  which  is  fitting
and proper. This levelling off of Dasein’s possibilities to what is 
proximally  at  its everyday  disposal  also results  in  a dimming  down of the
possible as such. The average everydayness of concern becomes blind to its
possibilities, and tranquillizes itself with that which is merely ‘actual’. This
tranquillizing does not rule out a high degree of diligence in one’s concern,
but arouses it. In this case no positive new possibilities are willed, but that
which  is  at  one’s  disposal  becomes  ‘tactically’  altered  in  such  a  way  that
there is a semblance of something happening.

All  the  same,  this  tranquillized  ‘willing’  under  the  guidance  of  the
“they”,  does  not  signify  that  one’s  Being  towards  one’s  potentiality-for-
Being has been extinguished, but only that it has been modified. In such a
case,  one’s  Being  towards  possibilities  shows  itself  for  the  most  part  as
mere  wishing.  In  the  wish  Dasein  projects  its  Being  upon  possibilities
which  not  only  have  not  been  taken  hold  of  in  concern,  but  whose
fulfilment has not even been pondered over and expected. On the contrary,
in  the  mode  of  mere  wishing,  the  ascendancy  of  Being-ahead-of-oneself
brings with it a lack of understanding for the factical possibilities. When the
world has been primarily projected as a wish-world, Being-in-the-world has
lost itself inertly in what is at its disposal; but it has done so in such a way
that, in the light of what is wished for, that which is at its disposal (and this
is  all  that  is  ready-to-hand)  is  never  enough.  Wishing  is  an  existential
modification  of  projecting  oneself  understandingly,  when  such  self-
projection  has  fallen  forfeit  to  thrownness  and  just  keeps  hankering  after
possibilities.(1) Such hankering closes off the possibilities; what is ‘there’ in
wishful  hankering  turns  into  the  ‘actual  world’.  Ontologically,  wishing
presupposes care.

is 

In  hankering,  Being-already-alongside...  takes  priority.  The  “ahead-of-
itself-in-Being-already-in...” 
correspondingly  modified.  Dasein’s
hankering  as  it  falls  makes  manifest  its  addiction  to  becoming  ‘lived’  by
whatever world it is in. This addiction shows the character of Being out for
something [Ausseins auf...]. Being-ahead-of-oneself has lost itself in a ‘just-
always-already-alongside’.(2)  What  one  is  addicted  ‘towards’  [Das  “Hin-
zu” des Hanges) is to let oneself be drawn by the sort of thing for which the

addiction hankers. If Dasein, as it were, sinks into an addiction then there is
not merely an addiction present-at-hand, but the entire structure of care has
been modified. Dasein has become blind, and puts all possibilities into the
service of the addiction.

H. 196

 

On the other hand, the urge ‘to live’ is something ‘towards’ which one is
impelled, and it brings the impulsion along with it of its own accord.(3) It is
‘towards this at any price’. The urge seeks to crowd out [verdrängen] other
possibilities. Here too the Being-ahead-of-oneself is one that is inauthentic,
even if one is assailed by an urge coming from the very thing that is urging
one  on.  The  urge  can  outrun  one’s  current  state-of-mind  and  one’s
understanding.  But  then  Dasein  is  not—and  never  is—a  ‘mere  urge’  to
which other kinds of controlling or guiding behaviour are added from time
to time; rather, as a modification of the entirety of Being-in-the-world, it is
always care already.

In  pure  urge,  care  has  not  yet  become  free,  though  care  first  makes  it
ontologically possible for Dasein to be urged on by itself.(4) In addiction,
however, care has always been bound. Addiction and urge are possibilities
rooted  in  the  thrownness  of  Dasein.  The  urge  ‘to  live’  is  not  to  be
annihilated;  the  addiction  to  becoming  ‘lived’  by  the  world  is  not  to  be
rooted out. But because these are both grounded ontologically in care, and
only  because  of  this,  they  are  both  to  be  modified  in  an  ontical  and
existentiell manner by care—by care as something authentic.
 

1. ‘…das, der Geworfenheit verfallen, den Möglichkeiten lediglich noch nachhängt.’
2.  ‘…in  ein  “Nur-immer-schon-bei...”.’  Here  we  follow  the  reading  of  the  later  editions.  The

earlier editions have ‘ “Nur-immer-schon-sein-bei...”’ (‘just-always-Being-already-alongside’).

3.  ‘Dagegen  ist  der  Drang  “zu  leben”  ein  “Hin-zu”,  das  von  ihm  selbst  her  den  Antrieb

mitbringt.’ The italicization of ‘Drang’ appears only in the later editions.

4. ‘…das Bedrängtsein des Daseins aus ihm selbst her...’

With  the  expression  ‘care’  we  have  in  mind  a  basic  existential-
ontological  phenomenon, which all the  same is not  simple in  its structure.
The  ontologically  elemental  totality  of  the  care-structure  cannot  be  traced
back  to  some  ontical  ‘primal  element’,  just  as  Being  certainly  cannot  be
‘explained’ in terms of entities. In the end it will be shown that the idea of

Being in general is just as far from being ‘simple’ as is the Being of Dasein.
In defining “care” as “Being-ahead-of-oneself—in-Being-already-in…—as
Being-alongside...”, we have made it plain that even this phenomenon is, in
itself,  still  structurally  articulated.  But  is  this  not  a  phenomenal  symptom
that  we  must  pursue  the  ontological  question  even  further  until  we  can
exhibit a still more primordial phenomenon which provides the ontological
support for the unity and the totality of the structural manifoldness of care?
Before we follow up this question, we must look back and appropriate with
greater  precision  what  we  have  hitherto  Interpreted  in  aiming  at  the
question  of  fundamental  ontology  as  to  the  meaning  of  Being  in  general.
First,  however,  we  must  show  that  what  is  ontologically  ‘new’  in  this
Interpretation  is  ontically  quite old.  In explicating Dasein’s Being  as care,
we  are  not  forcing  it  under  an  idea  of  our  own  contriving,  but  we  are
conceptualizing existentially what has already been disclosed in an ontico-
existentiell manner.

42. Confirmation  of  the  Existential  Interpretation  of  Dasein  as  Care

in terms of Dasein’s Pre-ontological Way of Interpreting Itself
 

1.  ‘Die  Bewährung  der  existenzialen  Interpretation  des  Daseins  als  Sorge  aus  der

vorontologischen Selbstauslegung des Daseins.’

H. 197

 

In our foregoing Interpretations, which have finally led to exhibiting care
as  the  Being  of  Dasein,  everything  depended  on  our  arriving  at  the  right
ontological foundations for that entity which in each case we ourselves are,
and  which  we  call  ‘man’.  To  do  this  it  was  necessary  from  the  outset  to
change  the  direction  of  our  analysis  from  the  approach  presented  by  the
traditional  definition  of  “man”—an  approach  which  has  not  been  clarified
ontologically  and  is  in  principle  questionable.  In  comparison  with  this
definition,  the  existential-ontological  Interpretation  may  seem  strange,
especially  if  ‘care’  is  understood  just  ontically  as  ‘worry’  or  ‘grief’  [als
“Besorgnis”  und  “Bekümmernis”].  Accordingly  we  shall  now  cite  a
its
document  which 
demonstrative force is ‘merely historical’.

in  character,  even 

is  pre-ontological 

though 

We  must  bear  in  mind,  however,  that  in  this  document  Dasein  is
expressing itself ‘primordially’, unaffected by any theoretical Interpretation
and without aiming to propose any. We must also note that Dasein’s Being
is  characterized  by  historicality,  though  this  must  first  be  demonstrated
ontologically. If Dasein is ‘historical’ in the very depths of its Being, then a
deposition [Aussage] which comes from its history and goes back to it, and
which,  moreover,  is prior  to  any  scientific  knowledge,  will  have  especial
weight,  even  though  its  importance  is  never  purely  ontological.  That
understanding  of  Being  which  lies  in  Dasein  itself,  expresses  itself  pre-
ontologically. The document which we are about to cite should make plain
that  our  existential  Interpretation  is  not  a  mere  fabrication,  but  that  as  an
ontological  ‘construction’  it  is  well  grounded  and  has  been  sketched  out
beforehand in elemental ways.

There  is  an  ancient  fable  in  which  Dasein’s  interpretation  of  itself  as

‘care’ has been embedded:(v)
 

v.  The  author  ran  across  the  following  pre-ontological  illustration  of  the  existential-ontological
Interpretation  of  Dasein  as  care  in  K.  Burdach’s  article.  ‘Faust  und  die  Sorge’  (Deutsche
Vierteljahrschrift  für  Literaturwissenschaft  und  Geistesgeschichte, vol.  I,  1923,  pp.  1  ff.).  Burdach
has shown that the fable of Cura (which has come down to us as No. 220 of the Fables of Hyginus)
was taken over from Herder by Goethe and worked up for the second part of his Faust. Cf. especially
pp. 40 ff. The text given above is taken from F. Bücheler (Rheinisches Museum, vol. 41, 1886, p. 5);
the translation is from Burdach, ibid., pp. 41 ff.

H. 198

 

Cura cum fluvium transiret, vidit cretosum lutum
sustulitque cogitabunda atque coepit fingere.
dum deliberat quid iam fecisset, Jovis intervenit.
rogat eum Cura ut det illi spiritum, et facile impetrat.
cui cum vellet Cura nomen ex sese ipsa imponere,
Jovis prohibuit suumque nomen ei dandum esse dictitat.
dum Cura et Jovis disceptant, Tellus surrexit simul
suumque nomen esse volt cui corpus praebuerit suum.
sumpserunt Saturnum iudicem, is sic aecus iudicat:
‘tu Jovis quia spiritum dedisti, in morte spiritum,
tuque Tellus, quia dedisti corpus, corpus recipito,
Cura eum quia prima finxit, teneat quamdiu vixerit.
sed quae nunc de nomine eius vobis controversia est,

homo vocetur, quia videtur esse factus ex humo.’

‘Once  when  ‘Care’  was  crossing  a  river,  she  saw  some  clay;  she
thoughtfully  took  up  a  piece  and  began  to  shape  it.  While  she  was
meditating  on  what  she  had  made,  Jupiter  came  by.  ‘Care’  asked  him  to
give it spirit, and this he gladly granted. But when she wanted her name to
be  bestowed  upon  it,  he  forbade  this,  and  demanded  that  it  be  given  his
name  instead.  While  ‘Care’  and  Jupiter  were  disputing,  Earth  arose  and
desired  that  her  own  name  be  conferred  on  the  creature,  since  she  had
furnished it with part of her body. They asked Saturn to be their arbiter, and
he  made  the  following  decision,  which  seemed  a  just  one:  ‘Since  you,
Jupiter,  have  given  its  spirit,  you  shall  receive  that  spirit  at  its  death;  and
since you, Earth, have given its body, you shall receive its body. But since
‘Care’ first shaped this creature, she shall possess it as long as it lives. And
because  there  is  now  a  dispute  among  you  as  to  its  name,  let  it  be  called
‘homo’, for it is made out of humus (earth).’(1)
 

1. In both the earlier and later editions Heidegger has ‘videt’ in the first line of the Latin version
of  the  fable,  where  Bücheler,  from  whom  the  text  has  been  taken,  has  ‘vidit’;  in  the  12th  line
Heidegger has ‘enim’ where Bücheler has ‘eum’. The punctuation of the Latin version is as Bücheler
gives  it.  The  single  quotation  marks  in  the  English  translation  correspond  strictly  to  the  double
quotation marks in Heidegger’s version; some of these are not found in Burdach’s translation, which,
except  for  two  entirely  trivial  changes,  Heidegger  has  otherwise  reproduced  very  accurately.  (On
Bücheler  and  Burdach,  see  Heidegger’s  note  v,  ad  loc.)  Our  translation  is  a  compromise  between
Burdach and the original Latin.

This  pre-ontological  document  becomes  especially  significant  not  only
in  that  ‘care’  is  here  seen  as  that  to  which  human  Dasein  belongs  ‘for  its
lifetime’, but also because this priority of ‘care’ emerges in connection with
the familiar way of taking man as compounded of body (earth) and spirit.
“Cura prima finxit”: in care this entity has the ‘source’ of its Being. “Cura
teneat,  quamdiu vixerit”; the  entity  is  not  released  from  this  source  but  is
held fast, dominated by it through and through as long as this entity ‘is in
the  world’.  ‘Being-in-the-world’  has  the  stamp  of  ‘care’,  which  accords
with its Being. It gets the name “homo” not in consideration of its Being but
in relation to that of which it consists (humus). The decision as to wherein
the  ‘primordial’  Being  of  this  creature  is  to  be  seen,  is  left  to  Saturn,
‘Time’.(vi)  Thus  the  pre-ontological  characterization  of  man’s  essence
expressed  in  this  fable,  has  brought  to  view  in  advance  the  kind  of  Being

which  dominates  his  temporal  sojourn  in  the  world,  and  does  so  through
and through.
 

vi. Cf. Herder’s poem: ‘Das Kind der Sorge’ (Suphan XXIX, 75).

H. 199

 

The history of the signification of the ontical concept of ‘care’ permits us
to see still further basic structures of Dasein. Burdach(vii) calls attention to
a double meaning of the term ‘cura’ according to which it signifies not only
‘anxious  exertion’  but  also  ‘carefulness’  and  ‘devotedness’  [“Sorgfalt”,
“Hingabe”].  Thus  Seneca  writes  in  his  last  epistle  (Ep. 124):  ‘Among  the
four  existent  Natures  (trees,  beasts,  man,  and  God),  the  latter  two,  which
alone  are  endowed  with  reason,  are  distinguished  in  that  God  is  immortal
while  man  is  mortal.  Now  when  it  comes  to  these,  the  good  of  the  one,
namely God, is fulfilled by his Nature; but that of the other, man, is fulfilled
by  care  (cura):  “unius  bonum  natura  perficit,  dei  scilicet,  alterius  cura,
hominis.”

Man’s perfectio—his transformation into that which he can be in Being-
free for his ownmost possibilities (projection)—is ‘accomplished’ by ‘care’.
But with equal primordiality ‘care’ determines what is basically specific in
this  entity,  according  to  which  it  has  been  surrendered  to  the  world  of  its
concern (thrownness). In the ‘double meaning’ of ‘care’, what we have in
view  is  a  single  basic  state  in  its  essentially  twofold  structure  of  thrown
projection.

As  compared  with  this  ontical  interpretation,  the  existential-ontological
Interpretation  is  not,  let  us  say,  merely  an  ontical  generalization  which  is
theoretical in character. That would just mean that ontically all man’s ways
of  behaving  are  ‘full  of  care’  and  are  guided  by  his  ‘devotedness’  to
something. The ‘generalization’ is rather one that is ontological and  a  p r i
o r i. What it has in view is not a set of ontical properties which constantly
keep  emerging,  but  a  state  of  Being  which  is  already  underlying  in  every
case,  and  which  first  makes  it  ontologically  possible  for  this  entity  to  be
addressed ontically  as “cura”. The  existential  condition  for  the  possibility
of  ‘the  cares  of  life’  and  ‘devotedness’,  must  be  conceived  as  care,  in  a
sense which is primordial—that is ontological.
 

vii. Burdach, op. cit., p. 49. Even as early as the Stoics, μέριμνα was a firmly established term,
and it recurs in the New Testament, becoming “sollicitudo” in the Vulgate. The way in which ‘care’
is viewed in the foregoing existential analytic of Dasein, is one which has grown upon the author in
connection with his attempts to Interpret the Augustinian (i.e., Helleno-Christian) anthropology with
regard to the foundational principles reached in the ontology of Aristotle.

H. 200

 

The  transcendental  ‘generality’  of  the  phenomenon  of  care  and  of  all
fundamental existentialia is,  on  the  other  hand,  broad  enough  to  present  a
basis on which every interpretation of Dasein which is ontical and belongs
to  a  world-view  must  move,  whether  Dasein  is  understood  as  affliction
[Not] and the ‘cares of life’ or in an opposite manner.

The  very  ‘emptiness’  and  ‘generality’  which  obtrude  themselves
ontically  in  existential  structures,  have  an  ontological  definiteness  and
fulness of their own. Thus Dasein’s whole constitution itself is not simple in
its unity, but shows a structural articulation; in the existential conception of
care, this articulation becomes expressed.

Thus, by our ontological Interpretation of Dasein, we have been brought
to  the  existential  conception  of  care  from  Dasein’s  pre-ontological
interpretation of itself as ‘care’. Yet the analytic of Dasein is not aimed at
laying  an  ontological  basis  for  anthropology;  its  purpose  is  one  of
fundamental  ontology.  This  is  the  purpose  that  has  tacitly  determined  the
course of our considerations hitherto, our selection of phenomena, and the
limits to which our analysis may proceed. Now, however, with regard to our
leading question of the meaning of Being and our way of working this out,
our investigation must give us explicit assurance as to what we have so far
achieved. But this sort of thing is not to be reached by superficially taking
together  what  we  have  discussed.  Rather,  with  the  help  of  what  we  have
achieved, that which could be indicated only crudely at the beginning of the
existential  analytic,  must  now  be  concentrated  into  a  more  penetrating
understanding of the problem.

43. Dasein, Worldhood, and Reality

 

The  question  of  the  meaning  of  Being  becomes  possible  at  all  only  if
there is something like an understanding of Being. Understanding of Being

belongs  to  the  kind  of  Being  which  the  entity  called  “Dasein”  possesses.
The more appropriately and primordially we have succeeded in explicating
this  entity,  the  surer  we  are  to  attain  our  goal  in  the  further  course  of
working out the problem of fundamental ontology.

H. 201

 

In our pursuit of the tasks of a preparatory existential analytic of Dasein,
Interpretation  of  understanding,  meaning,  and
there  emerged  an 
interpretation.  Our  analysis  of  Dasein’s  disclosedness  showed  further  that,
with this disclosedness, Dasein, in its basic state of Being-in-the-world, has
been revealed equiprimordially with regard to the world, Being-in, and the
Self. Furthermore, in the factical disclosedness of the world, entities within-
the-world are discovered too. This implies that the Being of these entities is
always understood in a certain manner, even if it is not conceived in a way
which  is  appropriately  ontological.  To  be  sure,  the  pre-ontological
understanding of Being embraces all entities which are essentially disclosed
in Dasein; but the understanding of Being has not yet Articulated itself in a
way which corresponds to the various modes of Being.

At the same time our interpretation of understanding has shown that, in
accordance  with  its  falling  kind  of  Being,  it  has,  proximally  and  for  the
most  part,  diverted  itself  [sich...  verlegt]  into  an  understanding  of  the
‘world’. Even where the issue is not only one of ontical experience but also
one  of  ontological  understanding,  the  interpretation  of  Being  takes  its
orientation in the first instance from the Being of entities within-the-world.
Thereby  the  Being  of  what  is  proximally  ready-to-hand  gets  passed  over,
and  entities  are  first  conceived  as  a  context  of  Things  (res)  which  are
present-at-hand.  “Being”  acquires 
the  meaning  of  “Reality”.(viii)
Substantiality becomes the basic characteristic of Being. Corresponding to
this way  in  which the  understanding  of Being  has been diverted,  even the
ontological  understanding  of  Dasein  moves  into  the  horizon  of  this
conception of Being. Like any other entity, Dasein too is present-at-hand as
Real.  In  this  way  “Being  in  general”  acquires  the  meaning  of  “Reality”.
Accordingly the concept of Reality has a peculiar priority in the ontological
problematic.  By  this  priority  the  route  to  a  genuine  existential  analytic  of
Dasein gets diverted, and so too does our very view of the Being of what is
proximally  ready-to-hand  within-the-world.  It  finally  forces  the  general

problematic  of  Being  into  a  direction  that  lies  off  the  course.  The  other
modes of Being  become defined negatively and privatively with  regard  to
Reality.

Thus not only the analytic of Dasein but the working-out of the question
of the meaning of Being in general must be turned away from a one-sided
orientation  with  regard  to  Being  in  the  sense  of  Reality.  We  must
demonstrate  that  Reality  is  not  only  one  kind  of  Being  among  others,  but
that  ontologically  it  has  a  definite  connection  in  its  foundations  with
Dasein,  the  world,  and  readiness-to-hand.  To  demonstrate  this  we  must
discuss in principle the problem of Reality, its conditions and its limits.
 

viii. Cf. H. 89 ff. and H. 100.

H. 202

 

Under the heading ‘problem of Reality’ various questions are clustered:
(1)  whether  any  entities  which  supposedly  ‘transcend  our  consciousness’
are at all; (2) whether this Reality of the ‘external world’ can be adequately
proved; (3) how far this entity, if it is Real, is to be known in its Being-in-
itself; (4) what the meaning of this entity, Reality, signifies in general. The
following  discussion  of the  problem  of Reality will treat  three topics  with
regard to the question of fundamental ontology: (a) Reality as a problem of
Being,  and  whether  the  ‘external  world’  can  be  proved;  (b) Reality  as  an
ontological problem; (c) Reality and care.

(a) Reality as a problem of Being, and whether the ‘External World’

can be Proved
 

Of  these  questions  about  Reality,  the  one  which  comes  first  in  order  is
the ontological question of what “Reality” signifies in general. But as long
as  a  pure  ontological  problematic  and  methodology  was  lacking,  this
question (if it was explicitly formulated at all) was necessarily confounded
with a discussion of the ‘problem of the external world’; for the analysis of
Reality is possible only on the basis of our having appropriate access to the
Real. But it has long been held that the way to grasp the Real is by that kind
of  knowing  which  is  characterized  by  beholding  [das  anschauende

in  which 

the  soul—or
Erkennen].  Such  knowing  ‘is’  as  a  way 
consciousness—behaves. In so far as Reality has the character of something
independent  and  “in  itself”,  the  question  of  the  meaning  of  “Reality”
becomes  linked  with  that  of  whether  the  Real  can  be  independent  ‘of
consciousness’  or  whether  there  can  be  a  transcendence  of  consciousness
into  the  ‘sphere’  of  the  Real.  The  possibility  of  an  adequate  ontological
analysis  of  Reality  depends  upon  how  far  that  of  which  the  Real  is  to  be
thus  independent—how  far  that  which  is  to  be  transcended(1)—has  itself
been clarified with regard to its Being. Only thus can even the kind of Being
which  belongs  to  transcendence  be  ontologically  grasped.  And  finally  we
must  make  sure  what  kind  of  primary  access  we  have  to  the  Real,  by
deciding the question of whether knowing can take over this function at all.
 

1. ‘…das, wovon Unabhängigkeit bestehen soll, was transzendiert werden soll…’

These 

investigations,  which 

take  precedence  over  any  possible
ontological  question  about  Reality,  have  been  carried  out  in  the  foregoing
existential analytic. According to this analytic, knowing is a founded mode
of  access  to  the  Real.  The  Real  is  essentially  accessible  only  as  entities
within-the-world. All access to such entities is founded ontologically upon
the basic state of Dasein, Being-in-the-world; and this in turn has care as its
even  more  primordial  state  of  Being  (ahead  of  itself—Being  already  in  a
world—as Being alongside entities within-the-world).

H. 203

 

The question of whether there is a world at all and whether its Being can
be proved, makes no sense if it is raised by Dasein  as Being-in-the-world;
and who else would raise it? Furthermore, it is encumbered with a double
signification. The world as the “wherein” [das Worin] of Being-in, and the
‘world’  as  entities  within-the-world  (that  in  which  [das  Wobei]  one  is
concernfully  absorbed)  either  have  been  confused  or  are  not  distinguished
at all. But the world is disclosed essentially along with the Being of Dasein;
with  the  disclosedness  of  the  world,  the  ‘world’  has  in  each  case  been
discovered too. Of course entities within-the-world in the sense of the Real
as  merely  present-at-hand,  are  the  very  things  that  can  remain  concealed.
But even the Real can be discovered only on the basis of a world which has

already  been  disclosed.  And  only  on  this  basis  can  anything  Real  still
remain hidden.  The  question  of  the  ‘Reality’  of  the  ‘external  world’  gets
raised without any previous clarification of the phenomenon of the world as
such. Factically, the ‘problem of the external world’ is  constantly oriented
with  regard  to  entities  within-the-world  (Things  and  Objects).  So  these
discussions drift along into a problematic which it is almost impossible to
disentangle ontologically.

Kant’s ‘Refutation of Idealism’(ix) shows how intricate these questions
are  and  how  what  one  wants  to  prove  gets  muddled  with  what  one  does
prove and with the means whereby the proof is carried out. Kant calls it ‘a
scandal of philosophy and of human reason in general’(x) that there is still
no cogent proof for the ‘Dasein of Things outside of us’ which will do away
with any scepticism. He proposes such a proof himself, and indeed he does
so to provide grounds for his ‘theorem’ that ‘The mere consciousness of my
own Dasein—a consciousness which, however, is empirical in character—
proves the Dasein of objects in the space outside of me.”(xi)

We  must  in  the  first  instance  note  explicitly  that  Kant  uses  the  term
‘Dasein’ to designate that kind of Being which in the present investigation
we  have  called  ‘presence-at-hand’.  ‘Consciousness  of  my  Dasein’  means
for  Kant  a  consciousness  of  my  Being-present-at-hand  in  the  sense  of
Descartes.  When  Kant  uses  the  term  ‘Dasein’  he  has  in  mind  the  Being-
present-at-hand of consciousness just as much as the Being-present-at-hand
of Things.
 

ix. Cf. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, pp. 274 ff., and further the corrections added in the preface
to the second edition, p. xxxix, note: see also ‘On the Paralogisms of the Pure Reason’, ibid., pp. 339
ff., especially p. 412.

x. Ibid., Preface, note.
xi. Ibid., p. 275.

H. 204

 

The proof for the ‘Dasein of Things outside of me’ is supported by the
fact that both change and performance belong, with equal primordiality, to
the  essence  of  time.  My  own  Being-present-at-hand—that  is,  the  Being-
present-at-hand of a multiplicity of representations, which has been given in
the inner sense—is a process of change which is present-at-hand. To have a
determinate  temporal  character  [Zeitbestimmtheit],  however,  presupposes

something present-at-hand which is permanent. But this cannot be ‘in us’,
‘for  only  through  what  is  thus  permanent  can  my  Dasein  in  time  be
determined’.(xii)  Thus  if  changes  which  are  present-at-hand  have  been
posited empirically ‘in me’, it is necessary that along with these something
permanent which is present-at-hand should be posited empirically ‘outside
of me’. What is thus permanent is the condition which makes it possible for
the changes ‘in me’ to be present-at-hand. The experience of the Being-in-
time  of  representations  posits  something  changing  ‘in  me’  and  something
permanent ‘outside of me’, and it posits both with equal primordiality.

Of  course  this  proof  is  not  a  causal  inference  and  is  therefore  not
encumbered with the disadvantages which that would imply. Kant gives, as
it were, an ‘ontological proof’ in terms of the idea of a temporal entity. It
seems at first as if Kant has given up the Cartesian approach of positing a
subject one can come across in isolation. But only in semblance. That Kant
demands  any  proof  at  all  for  the  ‘Dasein  of  Things  outside  of  me’  shows
already that he takes the subject—the ‘in me’—as the starting-point for this
problematic.  Moreover,  his  proof  itself  is  then  carried  through  by  starting
with  the  empirically  given  changes  ‘in  me’.  For  only  ‘in  me’  is  ‘time’
experienced,  and  time  carries  the  burden  of  the  proof.  Time  provides  the
basis for leaping off into what is ‘outside of me’ in the course of the proof.
Furthermore, Kant emphasizes that “The problematical kind  [of  idealism],
which  merely  alleges  our  inability  to  prove  by  immediate  experience  that
there is a Dasein outside of our own, is reasonable and accords with a sound
kind of philosophical thinking: namely, to permit no decisive judgment until
an adequate proof has been found.”(xiii)

But  even  if  the  ontical  priority  of  the  isolated  subject  and  inner
experience  should  be given  up, Descartes’ position  would  still  be retained
ontologically.  What  Kant  proves—if  we  may  suppose  that  his  proof  is
correct and correctly based—is that entities which are changing and entities
which  are  permanent  are  necessarily  present-at-hand  together.  But  when
two  things  which  are  present-at-hand  are  thus  put  on  the  same  level,  this
does not  as yet  mean that subject  and Object  are  present-at-hand  together.
And even if this were proved, what is ontologically decisive would still be
covered  up—namely,  the  basic  state  of  the  ‘subject’,  Dasein,  as  Being-in-
the-world.  The  Being-Present-at-hand-together  of  the  physical  and  the
psychical  is  completely  different  ontically  and  ontologically  from  the
phenomenon of Being-in-the-world.

 

 

xii. Ibid., p. 275.
xiii. Ibid., p. 275.

H. 205

Kant  presupposes  both  the  distinction  between  the  ‘in  me’  and  the
‘outside  of  me’,  and  also  the  connection  between  these;  factically  he  is
correct in doing so, but he is incorrect from the standpoint of the tendency
of his proof. It has not been demonstrated that the sort of thing which gets
established  about  the  Being-present-at-hand-together  of  the  changing  and
the  permanent  when  one  takes  time  as  one’s  clue,  will  also  apply  to  the
connection between the ‘in me’ and the ‘outside of me’. But if one were to
see  the  whole  distinction  between  the  ‘inside’  and  the  ‘outside’  and  the
whole connection between them which Kant’s proof presupposes, and if one
were  to  have  an  ontological  conception  of  what  has  been  presupposed  in
this  presupposition,  then  the  possibility  of  holding  that  a  proof  of  the
‘Dasein  of  Things  outside  of  me’  is  a  necessary  one  which  has  yet  to  be
given [noch ausstehend], would collapse.

The ‘scandal of philosophy’ is not that this proof has yet to be given, but
that  such  proofs  are  expected  and  attempted  again  and  again.  Such
expectations,  aims,  and  demands  arise  from  an  ontologically  inadequate
way of starting with something of such a character that independently of  it
and ‘outside’ of it a ‘world’ is to be proved as present-at-hand. It is not that
the  proofs  are  inadequate,  but  that  the  kind  of  Being  of  the  entity  which
does the proving and makes requests for proofs has not been made definite
enough. This is why a demonstration that two things which are present-at-
hand  are  necessarily  present-at-hand  together,  can  give  rise  to  the  illusion
that  something  has  been  proved,  or  even  can  be  proved,  about  Dasein  as
Being-in-the-world. If Dasein is understood correctly, it defies such proofs,
because, in its Being, it already is what subsequent proofs deem necessary
to demonstrate for it.

If  one  were  to  conclude  that  since  the  Being-present-at-hand  of  Things
outside of us is impossible to prove, it must therefore ‘be taken merely on
faith’(xiv) one would still fail to surmount this perversion of the problem.
The  assumption  would  remain  that  at  bottom  and  ideally  it  must  still  be
possible  to  carry  out  such  a  proof.  This  inappropriate  way  of  approaching

the  problem  is  still  endorsed  when  one  restricts  oneself  to  a  ‘faith  in  the
Reality  of  the  external  world’,  even  if  such  a  faith  is  explicitly
‘acknowledged’ as such. Although one is not offering a stringent proof, one
is still in principle demanding a proof and trying to satisfy that demand.
 

xiv. Ibid., Preface, note.
xv.  Cf.  W.  Dilthey,  ‘Beiträge  zur  Lösung  der  Frage  vom  Ursprung  unseres  Glaubens  an  die
Realität der Aussenwelt und seinem Recht’ (1890), Gesammelte Schriften, Vol. V, 1, pp. 90 ff. At the
very beginning of this article Dilthey says in no uncertain terms: ‘For if there is to be a truth which is
universally valid for man, then in accordance with the method first proposed by Descartes, thought
must make its way from the facts of consciousness rather than from external actuality.’ (Ibid., p. 90.)

H. 206

 

Even if one should invoke the doctrine that the subject must presuppose
and indeed always does unconsciously presuppose the presence-at-hand of
the  ‘external  world’,  one  would  still  be  starting  with  the  construct  of  an
isolated subject. The phenomenon of Being-in-the-world is something that
one would no more meet in this way than one would by demonstrating that
the  physical  and  the  psychical  are  present-at-hand  together.  With  such
presuppositions, Dasein always comes ‘too late’; for in so far as it does this
presupposing as an entity (and otherwise this would be impossible), it is, as
an  entity,  already  in  a  world.  ‘Earlier’  than  any  presupposition  which
Dasein makes, or any of its ways of behaving, is the ‘a priori’ character of
its state of Being as one whose kind of Being is care.

To have faith  in  the  Reality  of  the  ‘external  world’,  whether  rightly  or
wrongly; to “prove” this Reality for it, whether adequately or inadequately;
to presuppose  it,  whether  explicitly  or  not—attempts  such  as  these  which
have  not  mastered  their  own  basis  with  full  transparency,  presuppose  a
subject  which  is  proximally  worldless  or  unsure  of  its  world,  and  which
must, at bottom, first assure itself of a world. Thus from the very beginning,
Being-in-a-world is disposed to “take things” in some way [Auffassen], to
suppose,  to  be  certain,  to  have  faith—a  way  of  behaving  which  itself  is
always a founded mode of Being-in-the-world.

The ‘problem of Reality’ in the sense of the question whether an external
world is present-at-hand and whether such a world can be proved, turns out
to be an impossible one, not because its consequences lead to inextricable
impasses,  but  because  the  very  entity  which  serves  as  its  theme,  is  one
which, as it were, repudiates any such formulation of the question. Our task

is not to prove that an ‘external world’ is present-at-hand or to show how it
is present-at-hand, but to point out why Dasein, as Being-in-the-world, has
the  tendency  to  bury  the  ‘external  world’  in  nullity  ‘epistemologically’
before  going  on  to  prove  it.(1)  The  reason  for  this  lies  in  Dasein’s  falling
and  in  the  way  in  which  the  primary  understanding  of  Being  has  been
diverted  to  Being  as presence-at-hand—a diversion  which is  motivated  by
that  falling  itself.  If  one  formulates  the  question  ‘critically’  with  such  an
ontological  orientation,  then  what  one  finds  present-at-hand  as  proximally
and  solely  certain,  is  something  merely  ‘inner’.  After  the  primordial
phenomenon of Being-in-the-world has been shattered, the isolated subject
is  all  that  remains,  and  this  becomes  the  basis  on  which  it  gets  joined
together with a ‘world’.
 

1.  ‘…warum  das  Dasein  als  In-der-Welt-sein  die  Tendenz  hat,  die  “Aussenwelt”  zunächst

“erkenntnistheoretisch” in Nichtigkeit zu begraben um sie dann erst zu beweisen.

H. 207

 

In  this  investigation  we  cannot  discuss  at  length  the  many  attempts  to
solve the ‘problem of Reality’ which have been developed in various kinds
of  realism  and  idealism  and  in  positions  which  mediate  between  them.
Certainly  a  grain  of  genuine  inquiry  is  to  be  found  in  each  of  these;  but
certain as this is, it would be just as perverse if one should want to achieve a
tenable solution of the problem by reckoning up how much has been correct
in  each  case.  What  is  needed  rather  is  the  basic  insight  that  while  the
different epistemological directions which have been pursued have not gone
so very far off epistemologically, their neglect of any existential analytic of
Dasein  has  kept  them  from  obtaining  any  basis  for  a  well  secured
phenomenal  problematic.  Nor  is  such  a  basis  to  be  obtained  by
subsequently  making  phenomenological  corrections  on  the  concepts  of
subject and consciousness. Such a procedure would give no guarantee that
the inappropriate formulation of the question would not continue to stand.

Along with Dasein as Being-in-the-world, entities within-the-world have
in  each  case  already  been  disclosed.  This  existential-ontological  assertion
seems to accord with the thesis of realism that the external world is Really
present-at-hand.  In  so  far  as  this  existential  assertion  does  not  deny  that
entities within-the-world are present-at-hand, it agrees—doxographically, as

it were—with the thesis of realism in its results. But it differs in principle
from every kind of realism; for realism holds that the Reality of the ‘world’
not only needs to be proved but also is capable of proof. In the existential
these  positions  are  directly  negated.  But  what
assertion  both  of 
distinguishes  this  assertion  from  realism  altogether,  is  the  fact  that  in
realism there is a lack of ontological understanding. Indeed realism tries to
explain Reality ontically by Real connections of interaction between things
that are Real.

As  compared  with  realism,  idealism,  no  matter  how  contrary  and
untenable  it  may  be  in  its  results,  has  an  advantage  in  principle,  provided
that it does not misunderstand itself as ‘psychological’ idealism. If idealism
emphasizes  that  Being  and  Reality  are  only  ‘in  the  consciousness’,  this
expresses  an  understanding  of  the  fact  that  Being  cannot  be  explained
through  entities.  But  as  long  as  idealism  fails  to  clarify  what  this  very
understanding  of  Being  means  ontologically,  or  how  this  understanding  is
possible, or that it belongs to Dasein’s state of Being, the Interpretation of
Reality which idealism constructs is an empty one. Yet the fact that Being
cannot be explained through entities and that Reality is possible only in the
understanding of Being, does not absolve us from inquiring into the Being
of  consciousness,  of  the  res  cogitans  itself.  If  the  idealist  thesis  is  to  be
followed  consistently,  the  ontological  analysis  of  consciousness  itself  is
prescribed  as  an  inevitable  prior  task.  Only  because  Being  is  ‘in  the
consciousness’—that is to say, only because it is understandable in Dasein
—can  Dasein  also  understand  and  conceptualize  such  characteristics  of
Being as independence, the ‘in-itself’, and Reality in general. Only because
of  this  are  ‘independent’  entities,  as  encountered  within-the-world,
accessible to circumspection.

H. 208

 

If  what  the  term  “idealism”  says,  amounts  to  the  understanding  that
Being  can  never  be  explained  by  entities  but  is  already  that  which  is
‘transcendental’  for  every  entity,  then  idealism  affords  the  only  correct
possibility  for  a  philosophical  problematic.  If  so,  Aristotle  was  no  less  an
idealist than Kant. But if “idealism” signifies tracing back every entity to a
subject  or  consciousness  whose  sole  distinguishing  features  are  that  it
remains indefinite in  its Being  and is  best characterized negatively as ‘un-

Thing-like’, then this idealism is no less naïve in its method than the most
grossly militant realism.

It is still possible that one may give the problematic of Reality priority
over any orientation in terms of ‘standpoints’ by maintaining the thesis that
every  subject  is  what  it  is  only  for  an  Object,  and  vice versa.  But  in  this
formal  approach  the  terms  thus  correlated—like  the  correlation  itself—
remain  ontologically  indefinite.  At  the  bottom,  however,  the  whole
correlation  necessarily  gets  thought  of  as  ‘somehow’  being,  and  must
therefore  be  thought  of  with  regard  to  some  definite  idea  of  Being.  Of
course, if the existential-ontological basis has been made secure beforehand
by  exhibiting  Being-in-the-world,  then  this  correlation  is  one  that  we  can
know later as a formalized relation, ontologically undifferentiated.

Our  discussion  of  the  unexpressed  presuppositions  of  attempts  to  solve
the problem of Reality in ways which are just ‘epistemological’, shows that
this problem must be taken back, as an ontological one, into the existential
analytic of Dasein.(xvi)
 

xvi.  Following  Scheler’s  procedure,  Nicolai  Hartmann  has  recently  based  his  ontologically
oriented epistemology upon the thesis that knowing is a ‘relationship of Being’. Cf. his Grundzüge
einer  Metaphysik  der  Erkenntnis,  second  enlarged  edition,  1925.  Both  Scheler  and  Hartmann,
however, in spite of all the differences in the phenomenological bases from which they start, fail to
recognize that in its traditional basic orientation as regards Dasein, ‘ontology’ has been a failure, and
that  the  very  ‘relationship  of  Being’  which  knowing  includes  (see  above,  H.  59  ff.),  compels  such
‘ontology’  to  be  revised  in  its  principles,  not  just  critically  corrected.  Because  Hartmann
underestimates the unexpressed consequences of positing a relationship-of-Being without providing
an ontological clarification for it, he is forced into a ‘critical realism’ which is at bottom quite foreign
to  the  level  of  the  problematic  he  has  expounded.  On  Hartmann’s  way  of  taking  ontology,  cf.  his
‘Wie ist kritische Ontologie überhaupt möglich?‘, Festschrift für Paul Natorp, 1924, pp. 124 ff.

(b) Reality as an Ontological Problem

 

 

H. 209

If the term “Reality” is meant to stand for the Being of entities present-
at-hand  within-the-world  (res)  (and  nothing  else  is  understood  thereby),
then  when  it  comes  to  analysing  this  mode  of  Being,  this  signifies  that
the
entities  within-the-world  are  ontologically  conceivable  only 
phenomenon  of  within-the-world-ness  has  been  clarified.  But  within-the-
world-ness is based upon the phenomenon of the world, which, for its part,

if 

To  be  sure, 

as  an  essential  item  in  the  structure  of  Being-in-the-world,  belongs  to  the
basic  constitution  of  Dasein.  Being-in-the-world,  in  turn,  is  bound  up
ontologically  in  the  structural  totality  of  Dasein’s  Being,  and  we  have
characterized care as such a totality. But in this way we have marked out the
foundations  and  the  horizons  which  must  be  clarified  if  an  analysis  of
Reality  is  to  be  possible.  Only  in  this  connection,  moreover,  does  the
character of the “in-itself” become ontologically intelligible. By taking our
orientation  from  this  context  of  problems,  we  have  in  our  earlier  analyses
Interpreted the Being of entities within-the-world.(xvii)
the  Reality  of 

the  Real  can  be  characterized
phenomenologically  within  certain  limits  without  any  explicit  existential-
ontological  basis.  This  is  what  Dilthey  has  attempted  in  the  article
mentioned  above.  He  holds  that  the  Real  gets  experienced  in  impulse  and
will,  and  that  Reality  is  resistance,  or,  more  exactly,  the  character  of
resisting.(1) He then works out the phenomenon of resistance analytically.
This  is  the  positive  contribution  of  his  article,  and  provides  the  best
concrete substantiation for his idea of a ‘psychology which both describes
and  dissects’.  But  he  is  kept  from  working  out  the  analysis  of  this
phenomenon  correctly  by  the  epistemological  problematic  of  Reality.  The
‘principle of phenomenality’ does not enable him to come to an ontological
the  same
the  Being  of  consciousness. 
Interpretation  of 
consciousness,’ he writes, ‘the will and its inhibition emerge.’(xviii) What
kind of Being belongs to this ‘emerging’? What is the meaning of the Being
of the ‘within’? What relationship-of-Being does consciousness bear to the
Real  itself?  All  this  must  be  determined  ontologically.  That  this  has  not
been  done,  depends  ultimately  on  the  fact  that  Dilthey  has  left  ‘life’
standing  in  such  a  manner  that  it  is  ontologically  undifferentiated;  and  of
course  ‘life’  is  something  which  one  cannot  go  back  ‘behind’.  But  to
Interpret  Dasein  ontologically  does  not  signify  that  we  must  go  back
ontically  to  some  other  entity.  The  fact  that  Dilthey  has  been  refuted
epistemologically  cannot  prevent  us  from  making  fruitful  use  of  what  is
positive  in  his  analyses—the  very  thing  that  has  not  been  understood  in
such refutations.
 

‘Within 

xvii.  Cf.  especially  Section  16,  H.  72  ff.  (‘How  the  Worldly  Character  of  the  Environment
Announces  itself  in  Entities  Within-the-world’);  Section  18,  H.  83  ff.  (‘Involvement  and
Significance; the Worldhood of the World’); Section 29, H. 134 ff. (‘Dasein as State-of-Mind’). On
the Being-in-itself of entities within-the-world, cf. H. 75 ff.

xviii. Dilthey, op. cit., p. 134.

1. ‘Realität ist Widerstand, genauer Widerständigkeit.’

 

 

H. 210

Thus  Scheler  has  recently  taken  up  Dilthey’s  Interpretation  of  Reality.
(xix)  He  stands  for  a  ‘voluntative  theory  of  Dasein’.  Here  “Dasein”  is
understood  in  the  Kantian  sense  as  Being-present-at-hand.  The  ‘Being  of
objects is given immediately only in the way it is related to drive and will’.
Scheler not only emphasizes, as does Dilthey, that Reality is never primarily
given  in  thinking  and  apprehending;  he  also  points  out  particularly  that
cognition [Erkennen] itself is not judgment, and that knowing [Wissen] is a
‘relationship of Being’.

What  we  have  already  said  about  the  ontological  indefiniteness  of
Dilthey’s  foundations  holds  in  principle  for  this  theory  too.  Nor  can  the
fundamental  ontological  analysis  of  ‘life’  be  slipped  in  afterwards  as  a
the  supporting
substructure.  Such  a  fundamental  analysis  provides 
conditions  for  the  analysis  of  Reality—for  the  entire  explication  of  the
character  of  resisting  and  its  phenomenal  presuppositions.  Resistance  is
encountered in a not-coming-through, and it is encountered as a hindrance
to  willing  to  come  through.  With  such  willing,  however,  something  must
already  have  been  disclosed  which  one’s  drive  and  one’s  will  are  out  for.
But what they are out for is ontically indefinite, and this indefiniteness must
not be overlooked ontologically or taken as if it were nothing. When Being-
out-for-something  comes  up  against  resistance,  and  can  do  nothing  but
‘come up against it’, it is itself already alongside a totality of involvements.
But  the  fact  that  this  totality  has  been  discovered  is  grounded  in  the
disclosedness of the referential totality of significance. The experiencing of
resistance—that is, the discovery of what is resistant to one’s endeavours—
is  possible  ontologically  only  by  reason  of  the  disclosedness  of  the  world.
The  character  of  resisting  is  one  that  belongs  to  entities  with-the-world.
Factically,  experiences  of  resistance  determine  only  the  extent  and  the
direction  in  which  entities  encountered  within-the-world  are  discovered.
The summation of such experiences does not introduce the disclosure of the
world for the first time, but presupposes it. The ‘against’ and the ‘counter

to’  as  ontological  possibilities,  are  supported  by  disclosed  Being-in-the-
world.
 

xix. Cf. Scheler’s lecture, ‘Die Formen des Wissens und die Bildung’, 1925, notes 24 and 25. In
reading our proofs we notice that in the collection of Scheler’s treatises which has just appeared (Die
Wissensformen  und  die  Gesellschaft,  1926)  he  has  published  his  long-promised  study  ‘Erkenntnis
und Arbeit’ (pp. 233 ff.). Division VI of this treatise (p. 455) brings a more detailed exposition of his
‘voluntative theory of Dasein’, in connection with an evaluation and critique of Dilthey.

H. 211

 

Nor  is  resistance  experienced  in  a  drive  or  will  which  ‘emerges’  in  its
own  right.  These  both  turn  out  to  be  modifications  of  care.  Only  entities
with  this  kind  of  Being  can  come  up  against  something  resistant  as
something within-the-world. So if “Reality” gets defined as “the character
of resisting”, we must notice two things: first, that this is only one character
of Reality among others; second, that the character of resisting presupposes
necessarily  a  world  which  has  already  been  disclosed.  Resistance
characterizes the ‘external world’ in the sense of entities within-the-world,
but never in the sense of the world itself. ‘Consciousness of Reality’ is itself
a  way  of  Being-in-the-world.  Every  ‘problematic  of  the  external  world’
comes back necessarily to this basic existential phenomenon.

If the ‘cogito sum’ is to serve as the point of departure for the existential
analytic  of  Dasein,  then  it  needs  to  be  turned  around,  and  furthermore  its
content needs new ontologico-phenomenal confirmation. The ‘sum’ is  then
asserted  first,  and  indeed  in  the  sense  that  “I  am  in  a  world”.  As  such  an
entity,  ‘I  am’  in  the  possibility  of  Being  towards  various  ways  of
comporting  myself—namely,  cogitationes—as  ways  of  Being  alongside
entities within-the-world. Descartes, on the contrary, says that cogitationes
are  present-at-hand,  and  that  in  these  an  ego  is  present-at-hand  too  as  a
worldless res cogitans.

(c) Reality and Care

 

“Reality”,  as  an  ontological  term,  is  one  which  we  have  related  to
entities  within-the-world.  If  it  serves  to  designate  this  kind  of  Being  in
general, then readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand function as modes of

Reality.  If,  however,  one  lets  this  word  have  its  traditional  signification,
then it stands for Being in the sense of the pure presence-at-hand of Things.
But  not  all  presence-at-hand  is  the  presence-at-hand  of  Things.  The
‘Nature’  by  which  we  are  ‘surrounded’  is,  of  course,  an  entity  within-the-
world; but the kind of Being which it shows belongs neither to the ready-to-
hand nor to what is present-at-hand as ‘Things of Nature’. No matter how
this Being of ‘Nature’ may be Interpreted, all the modes of Being of entities
within-the-world  are  founded  ontologically  upon  the  worldhood  of  the
world, and accordingly upon the phenomenon of Being-in-the world. From
this  there  arises  the  insight  that  among  the  modes  of  Being  of  entities
within-the-world, Reality has no priority, and that Reality is a kind of Being
which cannot even characterize anything like the world or Dasein in a way
which is ontologically appropriate.

H. 212

 

In  the  order  of  the  ways  in  which  things  are  connected  in  their
ontological  foundations  and  in  the  order  of  any  possible  categorial  and
existential  demonstration,  Reality  is  referred  back  to  the  phenomenon  of
care.  But  the  fact  that  Reality  is  ontologically  grounded  in  the  Being  of
Dasein, does not signify that only when Dasein exists and as long as Dasein
exists, can the Real be as that which in itself it is.

Of  course  only  as  long  as  Dasein  is  (that  is,  only  as  long  as  an
understanding  of  Being  is  ontically  possible),  ‘is  there’  Being.(1)  When
Dasein does not exist, ‘independence’ ‘is’ not either, nor ‘is’ the ‘in-itself’.
In  such  a  case  this  sort  of  thing  can  be  neither  understood  nor  not
understood.  In  such  a  case  even  entities  within-the-world  can  neither  be
discovered nor lie hidden. In such a case it cannot be said that entities are,
nor  can  it  be  said  that  they  are  not.  But  now,  as  long  as  there  is  an
understanding of Being and therefore an understanding of presence-at-hand,
it can indeed be said that in this case entities will still continue to be.
 

1. ‘…“gibt es” Sein.’ In his letter Über den Humanismus (Klostermann, Frankfurt A.M., n.d., p.
22, reprinted from Platons Lehre von der Wahrheit, Francke A.G., Bern, 1947), Heidegger insists that
the expression ‘es gibt’ is here used deliberately, and should be taken literally as ‘it gives’. He writes:
‘For  the  “it”  which  here  “gives”  is  Being  itself.  The  “gives”,  however,  designates  the  essence  of
Being, which gives and which confers its truth.’ He adds that the ‘es gibt’ is used to avoid writing
that ‘Being is’, for the verb ‘is’ is appropriate to entities but not to Being itself.

As  we  have  noted,  Being  (not  entities)  is  dependent  upon  the
understanding  of  Being;  that  is  to  say,  Reality  (not  the  Real)  is  dependent
upon care. By this dependency our further analytic of Dasein is held secure
in  the  face  of  an  uncritical  Interpretation  which  nevertheless  keeps  urging
itself upon us—an Interpretation in which the idea of Reality is taken as the
clue  to  Dasein.  Only  if  we  take  our  orientation  from  existentiality  as
Interpreted in an ontologically positive manner, can we have any guarantee
that  in  the  factical  course  of  the  analysis  of  ‘consciousness’  or  of  ‘life’,
some sense of “Reality” does not get made basic, even if it is one which has
not been further differentiated.

Entities  with  Dasein’s  kind  of  Being  cannot  be  conceived  in  terms  of
Reality  and  substantiality;  we  have  expressed  this  by  the  thesis  that  the
substance  of  man  is  existence. Yet  if  we  have  Interpreted  existentiality  as
care,  and  distinguished  this  from  Reality,  this  does  not  signify  that  our
existential  analytic  is  at  an  end;  we  have  merely  allowed  the  intricate
problems of the question of Being and its possible modes, and the question
of the meaning of such modifications, to emerge more sharply: only if the
understanding of Being is, do entities as entities become accessible; only if
entities are of Dasein’s kind of Being is the understanding of Being possible
as an entity.

44. Dasein, Disclosedness, and Truth

 

 

H. 213

From  time  immemorial,  philosophy  has  associated  truth  and  Being.
Parmenides  was  the  first  to  discover  the  Being  of  entities,  and  he
‘identified’ Being with the perceptive understanding of Being: τὸ γὰρ αὐτὸ
νοεῖν  ἐστίν  τε  καὶ  εἶναι.(xx) Aristotle,  in  outlining  the  history  of  how  the
ἀρχαί have  been  uncovered,(xxi)  emphasizes  that  the  philosophers  before
him, under the guidance of ‘the things themselves’ have been compelled to
inquire further: αὐτὸ τὸ πρᾶγμα ὡδοποίησεν αὐτοῖς καὶ συνηνάγκασε ζητεῖν.
(xxii) He  is  describing  the  same  fact  when  he  says  that  ἀναγκαζόμενος  δ᾽
ἀκολουθεῖν  τοῖς  φαινομένοις  (xxiii)—that  he  (Parmenides)  was  compelled
to follow that which showed itself in itself. In another passage he remarks
that  these  thinkers  carried  on  their  researches  ὑπ᾽  αὐτῆς  τῆς  ἀληθείας

ἀναγκαζόμενοι(xxiv)—“compelled by the ‘truth’ itself”. Aristotle describes
these researches as φιλοσοφεῖν περὶ  τῆς  ἀληθείας(xxv)—“  ‘philosophizing’
about  the  ‘truth’  ”—or  even  as ἀποφαίνεσθαι  περὶ  τῆς  ἀληθείας(xxvi)—as
exhibiting  something  and  letting  it  be  seen  with  regard  to  the  ‘truth’  and
within the range of the ‘truth’. Philosophy itself is defined as ἐπιστήμην τῆς
ἀληθείας(xxvii)—“the science of the ‘truth’ ”. But it is also characterized as
ἐπιστήμη,  ἣ  θεωρεῖ  τὸ  ὂν  ᾗ  ὂν(xxviii)—as  “a  science  which  contemplates
entities as entities”—that is, with regard to their Being.

What  is  signified  here  by  ‘carrying  on  researches  into  the  “truth”  ’,  by
“science  of  the  ‘truth’  ”? In  such  researches  is  ‘truth’  made  a  theme  as  it
would  be  in  a  theory  of  knowledge  or  of  judgment?  Manifestly  not,  for
‘truth’  signifies  the  same  as  ‘thing’  [“Sache”],  ‘something  that  shows
itself’. But what then does the expression ‘truth’ signify if it can be used as
a term for ‘entity’ and ‘Being’?

If, however, truth rightfully has a primordial connection with Being, then
the  phenomenon  of  truth  comes  within  the  range  of  the  problematic  of
fundamental  ontology.  In  that  case,  must  not  this  phenomenon  have  been
encountered  already  within  our  preparatory  fundamental  analysis,  the
analytic  of  Dasein?  What  ontico-ontological  connection  does  ‘truth’  have
with Dasein and with that ontical characteristic of Dasein which we call the
“understanding  of  Being”?  Can  the  reason  why  Being  necessarily  goes
together  with  truth  and  vice  versa  be  pointed  out  in  terms  of  such
understanding?

These  questions  are  not  to  be  evaded.  Because  Being  does  indeed  ‘go
together’  with  truth,  the  phenomenon  of  truth  has  already  been  one  of  the
themes  of  our  earlier  analyses,  though  not  explicitly  under  this  title.  In
giving  precision  to  the  problem  of  Being,  it  is  now  time  to  delimit  the
phenomenon of truth explicitly and to fix the problems which it comprises.
In  doing  this,  we  should  not  just  take  together  what  we  have  previously
taken apart. Our investigation requires a new approach.
 

xx. Diels, Fragment 5. [This passage may be translated in more than one way: e.g., ‘for thought
and being are the same thing’ (Fairbanks); ‘it is the same thing that can be thought and that can be’
(Burnet).—Tr.]

xxi. Aristotle, Metaphysica A.
xxii. Ibid., A, 984a  18  ff.  [‘...the  very  fact  showed  them  the  way  and  joined  in  forcing  them  to

investigate the subject.’ (Ross)—Tr.]

xxiii. Ibid., A, 986b 31.
xxiv. Ibid., A, 984b 10.

xxv. Ibid., A, 983b 2. Cf. 988a 20.
xxvi. Ibid., aI, 993b 17.
xxvii. Ibid., aI, 993b 20.
xxviii. Ibid., Г 1, 1003a 21.

H. 214

 

Our analysis takes its departure from the traditional conception of truth,
and attempts to lay bare the ontological foundations of that conception (a).
In terms of these foundations the primordial phenomenon of truth becomes
visible. We can then exhibit the way in which the traditional conception of
truth  has  been  derived  from  this  phenomenon  (b).  Our  investigation  will
make  it  plain  that  to  the  question  of  the  ‘essence’  of  truth,  there  belongs
necessarily  the  question  of  the  kind  of  Being  which  truth  possesses.
Together  with  this  we  must  clarify  the  ontological  meaning  of  the  kind  of
talk in which we say that ‘there is truth’, and we must also clarify the kind
of necessity with which ‘we must presuppose’ that ‘there is’ truth (c).

(a)  The  Traditional  Conception  of  Truth,  and  its  Ontological

Foundations
 

There are three theses which characterize the way in which the essence
of truth has been traditionally taken and the way it is supposed to have been
first defined: (1) that the ‘locus’ of truth is assertion (judgment); (2) that the
essence of truth lies in the ‘agreement’ of the judgment with its object; (3)
that  Aristotle,  the  father  of  logic,  not  only  has  assigned  truth  to  the
judgment as its primordial locus but has set going the definition of “truth”
as ‘agreement’.(1)

Here it is not our aim to provide a history of the concept of truth, which
could  be  presented  only  on  the  basis  of  a  history  of  ontology.  We  shall
introduce our analytical discussions by alluding to some familiar matters.

Aristotle  says  that  the  παθήματα  τῆς  ψυχῆς  are  τὧν  πραγμάτων
ὁμοιώματα(xxix)—that 
νοήματα
soul’s 
(‘representations’), are likenings of Things. This assertion, which is by no
means  proposed  as  an  explicit  definition  of  the  essence  of  truth,  has  also
given occasion for developing the later formulation of the essence of truth
as adaequatio  intellectus  et  rei.(2) Thomas  Aquinas,(xxx)  who  refers  this

‘Experiences’, 

the 

its 

definition to Avicenna (who, in turn, has taken it over from Isaac Israeli’s
tenth-century ‘Book  of  Definitions’)  also  uses  for  “adaequatio”  (likening)
the 
terms  “correspondentia”  (“correspondence”)  and  “convenientia”
(“coming together”).
 

xxix. Aristotle, De interpretatione 1, 16a. 6. [This is not an exact quotation.—Tr.]
xxx. Cf. Thomas Aquinas, Quaestiones disputatae de veritate, qu. 1, art. 1.

1. Here we follow the older editions in reading ‘...hat sowohl die Wahrheit dem Urteil als ihrem
ursprünglichen Ort zugewiesen als auch die Definition der Wahrheit als “Ubereinstimmung” in Gang
gebracht.’ The newer editions read ‘...hat sowohl… zugewiesen, er hat auch...’

2. This is usually translated as ‘adequation of the intellect and the thing’. Heidegger makes the
connection seem closer by translating both the Latin adaequatio and the Greek ὁμοίωμα by the word
‘Angleichung’, which we have somewhat arbitrarily translated as ‘likening’.

 

 

H. 215

The  neo-Kantian  epistemology  of 

the  nineteenth  century  often
characterized 
this  definition  of  “truth”  as  an  expression  of  a
methodologically retarded naïve realism, and declared it to be irreconcilable
with  any  formulation  of  this  question  which  has  undergone  Kant’s
‘Copernican revolution’. But Kant too adhered to this conception of truth,
so  much  so  that  he  did  not  even  bring  it  up  for  discussion;  this  has  been
overlooked, though Brentano has already called our attention to it. ‘The old
and  celebrated  question  with  which  it  was  supposed  that  one  might  drive
the logicians into a corner is this: “what is truth?” The explanation of the
name of truth—namely, that it is the agreement of knowledge with its object
—will here be granted and presupposed…’(xxxi)

‘If truth consists in the agreement of knowledge with its object, then this
object  must  thus  be  distinguished  from  others;  for  knowledge  is  false  if  it
does  not  agree  with  the  object  to  which  it  is  related,  even  if  it  should
contain something which might well be valid for other objects.’(xxxii) And
in the introduction to the “Transcendental Dialectic” Kant states: ‘Truth and
illusion  are  not  in  the  object  so  far  as  it  is  intuited,  but  in  the  judgment
about it so far as it is thought.’(xxxiii)

Of  course  this  characterization  of  truth  as  ‘agreement’,  adaequatio,
ὁμοίωσις, is very general and empty. Yet it will still have some justification
if  it  can  hold  its  own  without  prejudice  to  any  of  the  most  various
Interpretations  which  that  distinctive  predicate  “knowledge”  will  support.

We  are  now  inquiring  into  the  foundations  of  this  ‘relation’.  What  else  is
tacitly posited in this relational totality of the  a d a e q u a t i o  i n t e l l e
c t u s  e t  r e i? And  what ontological  character does that which  is  thus
posited have itself?
 

xxxi. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, p. 82.
xxxii.  Ibid.,  p.  83.  [Two  trivial  misprints  in  this  quotation  which  appear  in  the  earlier  editions

have been corrected in the later editions.—Tr.]

xxxiii. Ibid., p. 350. [Another trivial misprint has been corrected in the later editions.—Tr.]

H. 216

 

What  in  general  does  one  have  in  view  when  one  uses  the  term
‘agreement’?  The  agreement  of  something  with  something  has  the  formal
character  of  a  relation  of  something  to  something.  Every  agreement,  and
therefore  ‘truth’  as  well,  is  a  relation.  But  not  every  relation  is  an
agreement.  A  sign  points  at  what  is  indicated.(1)  Such  indicating  is  a
relation,  but  not  an  agreement  of  the  sign  with  what  is  indicated.  Yet
manifestly  not  every  agreement  is  a  convenientia  of  the  kind  that  is  fixed
upon  in  the  definition  of  “truth”.  The  number  “6”  agrees  with  “16  minus
10”.  These  numbers  agree;  they  are  equal  with  regard  to  the  question  of
“how  much?”  Equality  is  one  way  of  agreeing.  Its  structure  is  such  that
something like a ‘with-regard-to’ belongs to it. In the adaequatio something
gets  related;  what  is  that  with  regard  to  which  it  agrees?  In  clarifying  the
‘truth-relation’  we  must  notice  also  what  is  peculiar  to  the  terms  of  this
relation. With regard to what do intellectus and res  agree? In their  kind  of
Being and their essential content do they give us anything at all with regard
to  which  they  can  agree?  If  it  is  impossible  for  intellectus  and  res  to  be
equal  because  they  are  not  of  the  same  species,  are  they  then  perhaps
similar? But knowledge is still supposed to ‘give’ the thing just as it is. This
‘agreement’  has  the  Relational  character  of  the  ‘just  as’  [“So—Wie”].  In
what way is this relation possible as a relation between intellectus and res?
From these questions it becomes plain that to clarify the structure of truth it
is not enough simply to presuppose this relational totality, but we must go
back and inquire into the context of Being which provides the support for
this totality as such.
 

1. ‘Ein Zeichen zeigt auf das Gezeigte.’

Must  we,  however,  bring  up  here  the  ‘epistemological’  problematic  as
regards  the  subject-Object  relation,  or  can  our  analysis  restrict  itself  to
Interpreting the ‘immanent consciousness of truth’, and thus remain ‘within
the sphere’ of the subject? According to the general opinion, what is true is
knowledge.  But  knowledge  is  judging.  In  judgment  one  must  distinguish
between the judging as a Real psychical process, and that which is judged,
as  an  ideal  content.  It  will  be  said  of  the  latter  that  it is  ‘true’.  The  Real
psychical  process,  however,  is  either  present-at-hand  or  not.  According  to
this  opinion,  the  ideal  content  of  judgment  stands  in  a  relationship  of
agreement. This relationship thus pertains to a connection between an ideal
content  of  judgment  and  the  Real  Thing  as  that  which  is  judged  about. Is
this agreement Real or ideal in its kind of Being, or neither of these? How
are  we  to  take  ontologically  the  relation  between  an  ideal  entity  and
something that is Real and present-at-hand? Such a relation indeed subsists
[besteht]; and in factical judgments it subsists not only as a relation between
the  content  of  judgment  and  the  Real  Object,  but  likewise  as  a  relation
between  the  ideal  content  and  the  Real  act  of  judgment.  And  does  it
manifestly subsist ‘more inwardly’ in this latter case?

Or  is  the  ontological  meaning  of  the  relation  between  Real  and  ideal
(μέθεξις) something about which we must not inquire? Yet the relation is to
be  one  which  subsists.  What  does  such  “subsisting”  [Bestand]  mean
ontologically?

H. 217

 

Why  should  this  not  be  a  legitimate  question?  Is  it  accidental  that  no
headway has been made with this problem in over two thousand years? Has
the question already been perverted in the very way it has been approached
—in the ontologically unclarified separation of the Real and the ideal?

And  with  regard  to  the  ‘actual’  judging  of  what  is  judged,  is  the
separation  of  the  Real  act  of  judgment  from  the  ideal  content  altogether
unjustified?  Does  not  the  actuality  of  knowing  and  judging  get  broken
asunder  into  two  ways  of  Being—two  ‘levels’  which  can  never  be  pieced
together  in  such  a  manner  as  to  reach  the  kind  of  Being  that  belongs  to
knowing? Is not psychologism correct in holding out against this separation,
even if it neither clarifies ontologically the kind of Being which belongs to

the  thinking  of  that  which  is  thought,  nor  is  even  so  much  as  acquainted
with it as a problem?

If  we  go  back  to  the  distinction  between  the  act  of  judgment  and  its
content, we shall not advance our discussion of the question of the kind of
Being  which  belongs  to  the  adaequatio;  we  shall  only  make  plain  the
indispensability of clarifying the kind of Being which belongs to knowledge
itself. In the analysis which this necessitates we must at the same time try to
bring  into  view  a  phenomenon  which  is  characteristic  of  knowledge—the
phenomenon  of  truth.  When  does  truth  become  phenomenally  explicit  in
knowledge itself? It does so when such knowing demonstrates itself as true.
By  demonstrating  itself  it  is  assured  of  its  truth.  Thus  in  the  phenomenal
context  of  demonstration,  the  relationship  of  agreement  must  become
visible.

Let us suppose that someone with his back turned to the wall makes the
true assertion that ‘the picture on the wall is hanging askew.’ This assertion
demonstrates itself when the man who makes it, turns round and perceives
the  picture  hanging  askew  on  the  wall.  What  gets  demonstrated  in  this
demonstration? What is the meaning of “confirming” [Bewährung] such an
assertion?  Do  we,  let  us  say,  ascertain  some  agreement  between  our
‘knowledge’ or ‘what  is  known’  and  the  Thing  on  the  wall?  Yes  and  no,
depending  upon  whether  our  Interpretation  of  the  expression  ‘what  is
known’ is phenomenally appropriate. If he who makes the assertion judges
without perceiving the picture, but ‘merely represents’ it to himself, to what
is  he  related?  To  ‘representations’,  shall  we  say?  Certainly  not,  if
“representation”  is  here  supposed  to  signify  representing,  as  a  psychical
process. Nor is he related to “representations” in the sense of what is thus
“represented,” if what we have in mind here is a ‘picture’ of that Real Thing
which is on the wall.(1) The asserting which ‘merely represents’ is related
rather, in that sense which is most its own, to the Real picture on the wall.
What  one  has  in  mind  is  the  Real  picture,  and  nothing  else.  Any
Interpretation  in  which  something  else  is  here  slipped  in  as  what  one
supposedly  has  in  mind  in  an  assertion  that  merely  represents,  belies  the
phenomenal facts of the case as to that about which the assertion gets made.
Asserting  is  a  way  of  Being  towards  the  Thing  itself  that  is.(2)  And  what
does one’s perceiving of it demonstrate?
 

1. ‘Er ist auch nicht auf Vorstellungen bezogen im Sinne des Vorgestellten, sofern damit gemeint
wird  ein  “Bild”  von  dem  realen  Ding  an  der  Wand.’  While  we  follow  tradition  in  translating

‘Vorstellung’ as ‘representation’, the literal meaning is somewhat closer to ‘putting before us’. In this
sense our ‘picture’ or ‘image’ (‘Bild’) of the actual picture (‘Bild’) on the wall, is itself something
which  we have  ‘put  before us’  and  which  is thus  ‘vorgestellt’, though in English  we would hardly
call it ‘that which we represent’.

2. ‘Das Aussagen ist ein Sein zum seienden Ding selbst.’

H. 218

 

Nothing  else  than  that  this  Thing  is  the  very  entity  which  one  has  in
mind in one’s assertion. What comes up for confirmation is that this entity
is pointed out by the Being in which the assertion is made—which is Being
towards what is put forward in the assertion; thus what is to be confirmed is
that  such  Being  uncovers  the  entity  towards  which  it  is.  What  gets
demonstrated  is  the  Being-uncovering  of  the  assertion.(1)  In  carrying  out
such a demonstration, the knowing remains related solely to the entity itself.
In  this  entity  the  confirmation,  as  it  were,  gets  enacted.  The  entity  itself
which  one  has  in  mind  shows  itself  just as  it  is  in  itself;  that  is  to  say,  it
shows  that  it,  in  its  selfsameness,  is  just  as  it  gets  pointed  out  in  the
assertion  as  being—just  as  it gets  uncovered  as  being.  Representations  do
not get compared, either among themselves or in relation to the Real Thing.
What is to be demonstrated is not an agreement of knowing with its object,
still  less  of  the  psychical  with  the  physical;  but  neither  is  it  an  agreement
between  ‘contents  of  consciousness’  among  themselves.  What  is  to  be
demonstrated  is  solely  the  Being-uncovered  [Entdeckt-sein]  of  the  entity
itself—that entity in the “how” of its uncoveredness. This uncoveredness is
confirmed  when  that  which  is  put  forward  in  the  assertion  (namely  the
entity itself) shows itself as that very same thing. “Confirmation” signifies
the  entity’s  showing  itself  in  its  selfsameness.(xxxiv)  The  confirmation  is
accomplished  on  the  basis  of  the  entity’s  showing  itself.  This  is  possible
only  in  such  a  way  that  the  knowing  which  asserts  and  which  gets
confirmed  is,  in  its  ontological  meaning,  itself  a  Being  towards  Real
entities, and a Being that uncovers.
 

xxxiv.  On  the  idea  of  demonstration  as  ‘identification’  cf.  Husserl,  Logische  Untersuchungen,
vol. II, part 2, Untersuchung VI. On ‘evidence and truth’ see ibid., Sections 36-39, pp. 115 ff. The
usual presentations of the phenomenological theory of truth confine themselves to what has been said
in the critical prolegomena (vol. I), and mention that this is connected with Bolzano’s theory of the
proposition. But the positive phenomenological Interpretations, which differ basically from Bolzano’s
theory, have been neglected. The only person who has taken up these investigations positively from
outside  the  main  stream  of  phenomenological  research,  has  been  E.  Lask,  whose  Logik  der

Philosophie  (1911)  was  as  strongly  influenced  by  the  sixth  Untersuchung  (Über  sinnliche  und
kategoriale Anschauungen’, pp. 128 ff.) as his Lehre vom Urteil (1912) was influenced by the above-
mentioned sections on evidence and truth.
 

1.  ‘Ausgewiesen  wird  das  Entdeckend-sein  der  Aussage.’  Here  and  in  the  following  pages  we
find the expression ‘Entdeckend-sein’ consistently printed with a hyphen in the more recent editions.
In the older editions it is written sometimes as one word, sometimes as two, and it is hyphenated only
at the ends of lines. In both editions we sometimes find this word printed with a lower-case initial.
We have marked such cases with an asterisk; for while we prefer the translation ‘Being-uncovering’
in such cases, the lower-case initia suggests that ‘to-be-uncovering’ may be a better reading.

H. 219

 

To say that an assertion “is true” signifies that it uncovers the entity as it
is in itself. Such an assertion asserts, points out, ‘lets’ the entity ‘be seen’
(ἀπόφανσις)  in  its  uncoveredness.  The  Being-true  (truth)  of  the  assertion
must be understood as Being-uncovering*. Thus truth has by no means the
structure of an agreement between knowing and the object in the sense of a
likening of one entity (the subject) to another (the Object).

Being-true  as  Being-uncovering*,  is  in  turn  ontologically  possible  only
on the basis of Being-in-the-world. This latter phenomenon, which we have
known  as  a  basic  state  of  Dasein,  is  the  foundation  for  the  primordial
phenomenon of truth. We shall now follow this up more penetratingly.

(b)  The  Primordial  Phenomenon  of  Truth  and  the  Derivative

Character of the Traditional Conception of Truth
 

“Being-true” (“truth”) means Being-uncovering*. But is not this a highly
arbitrary  way  to  define  “truth”?  By  such  drastic  ways  of  defining  this
concept  we  may  succeed  in  eliminating  the  idea  of  agreement  from  the
conception of truth. Must we not pay for this dubious gain by plunging the
‘good’  old  tradition  into  nullity?  But  while  our  definition  is  seemingly
arbitrary,  it  contains  only  the  necessary  Interpretation  of  what  was
primordially surmised in the oldest tradition of ancient philosophy and even
understood in a pre-phenomenological manner. If a λόγος as ἀπόφανσις is to
be  true,  its  Being-true  is  ἀληθεύειν  in  the  manner  of  ἀποφαίνεσθαι—of
taking  entities  out  of  their  hiddenness  and  letting  them  be  seen  in  their
unhiddenness  (their  uncoveredness).  The  ἀλήθεια  which  Aristotle  equates

with πρᾶγμα and φαινόμενα in the passages cited above, signifies the ‘things
themselves’;  it  signifies  what  shows  itself—entities in  the  “how”  of  their
uncoveredness.  And  is  it  accidental  that  in  one  of  the  fragments  of
Heracleitus(xxxv)—the oldest fragments of philosophical doctrine in which
the  λόγος  is  explicitly  handled—the  phenomenon  of  truth  in  the  sense  of
uncoveredness  (unhiddenness)  as  we  have  set  it  forth,  shows  through?
Those who are lacking in understanding are contrasted with the λόγος,  and
also  with  him  who  speaks  that  λόγος,  and  understands  it.  The  λόγος  is
φράζων  όπως  ἔχει:  it  tells  bow  entities  comport  themselves.  But  to  those
who are lacking in understanding, what they do remains hidden—λανθάνει.
They  forget  it  (ἐπιλανθάνονται);  that  is,  for  them  it  sinks  back  into
hiddenness. Thus to the λόγος belongs unhiddennes—ἀ-λήθεια. To translate
this word as ‘truth’, and, above all, to define this expression conceptually in
theoretical ways, is to cover up the meaning of what the Greeks made ‘self-
evidently’ basic for the terminological use of ἀλήθεια as a pre-philosophical
way of understanding it.
 

xxxv. Cf. Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, Heracleitus fragment B 1.

H. 220

 

In  citing  such  evidence  we  must  avoid  uninhibited  word-mysticism.
Nevertheless, the ultimate business of philosophy is to preserve the force of
the most elemental words in which Dasein expresses itself, and to keep the
common  understanding  from  levelling  them  off  to  that  unintelligibility
which functions in turn as a source of pseudo-problems.

We  have  now  given  a  phenomenal  demonstration  of  what  we  set  forth
earlier(xxxvi)  as  to  λόγος  and  ἀλήθεια  in,  so  to  speak,  a  dogmatic
Interpretation. In proposing our ‘definition’ of “truth” we have not shaken
off  the  tradition,  but  we  have  appropriated  it  primordially;  and  we  shall
have done so all the more if we succeed in demonstrating that the idea of
agreement is one to which theory had to come on the basis of the primordial
phenomenon of truth, and if we can show how this came about.

Moreover, the ‘definition’ of “truth” as “uncoveredness” and as “Being-
uncovering”,  it  not  a  mere  explanation  of  a  word.  Among  those  ways  in
which  Dasein  comports  itself  there  are  some  which  we  are  accustomed  in

the  first  instance  to  call  ‘true’;  from  the  analysis  of  these  our  definition
emerges.

Being-true  as  Being-uncovering*,  is  a  way  of  Being  for  Dasein.  What
makes this very uncovering possible must necessarily be called ‘true’ in a
still  more  primordial  sense.  The  most  primordial  phenomenon  of  truth  is
first shown by the existential-ontological foundations of uncovering.

Uncovering  is  a  way  of  Being  for  Being-in-the-world.  Circumspective
concern,  or  even  that  concern  in  which  we  tarry  and  look  at  something,
uncovers  entities  within-the-world.  These  entities  become  that  which  has
been  uncovered.  They  are  ‘true’  in  a  second  sense.  What  is  primarily
‘true’—that is, uncovering—is Dasein. “Truth” in the second sense does not
Being-uncovered
mean 
(uncoveredness).
 

Being-uncovering* 

(uncovering), 

but 

xxxvi. Cf. H. 32 ff.

H. 221

 

Our earlier analysis of the worldhood of the world and of entities within-
the-world  has  shown,  however,  that  the  uncoveredness  of  entities  within-
the-world  is  grounded  in  the  world’s  disclosedness.  But  disclosedness  is
that  basic  character  of  Dasein  according  to  which  it  is  its  “there”.
Disclosedness is constituted by state-of-mind, understanding, and discourse,
and pertains equiprimordially to the world, to Being-in, and to the Self. In
its  very  structure,  care  is  ahead  of  itself—Being  already  in  a  world—as
Being  alongside  entities  within-the-world;  and  in  this  structure  the
disclosedness of Dasein lies hidden. With and through it is  uncoveredness;
(1)  hence  only  with  Dasein’s  disclosedness  is  the  most  primordial
phenomenon of truth attained. What we have pointed out earlier with regard
to  the  existential  Constitution  of  the  “there”(xxxvii)  and  in  relation  to  the
everyday  Being  of  the  “there”,(xxxviii)  pertains  to  the  most  primordial
phenomenon of truth, nothing less. In so far as Dasein is its disclosedness
essentially, and discloses and uncovers as something disclosed to this extent
it is essentially ‘true’. Dasein is  ‘in  the  truth’. This  assertion has meaning
ontologically. It does not purport to say that ontically Dasein is introduced
‘to  all  the  truth’  either  always  or  just  in  every  case,  but  rather  that  the
disclosedness of its ownmost Being belongs to its existential constitution.

 

 

xxxvii. Cf. H. 134 ff.
xxxviii. Cf. H. 166 ff.

1. ‘Mit und durch sie ist Entdecktheit...’ Our version reflects the ambiguity of the German, which
leaves  the  grammatical  function  of  the  pronoun  ‘sie’  obscure  and  permits  it  to  refer  either  to  ‘the
disclosedness of Dasein’, to ‘care’, or—perhaps most likely—to ‘the structure of care’.

If  we  accept  the  results  we  have  obtained  earlier,  the  full  existential
meaning of the principle that ‘Dasein is in the truth’ can be restored by the
following considerations:

(1)  To  Dasein’s  state  of  Being,  disclosedness  in  general  essentially
belongs. It embraces the whole of that structure-of-Being which has become
explicit through the phenomenon of care. To care belongs not only Being-
in-the-world  but  also  Being  alongside  entities  within-the-world.  The
uncoveredness of such entities is equiprimordial with the Being of Dasein
and its disclosedness.

(2)  To  Dasein’s  state  of  Being  belongs  thrownness;  indeed  it  is
constitutive  for  Dasein’s  disclosedness.  In  thrownness  is  revealed  that  in
each case Dasein, as  m y  Dasein and  t h i s  Dasein, is already in a definite
world  and  alongside  a  definite  range  of  definite  entities  within-the-world.
(1) Disclosedness is essentially factical.

(3)  To  Dasein’s  state  of  Being  belongs  projection—disclosive  Being
towards  its  potentiality-for-Being.  As  something  that  understands,  Dasein
can understand itself in  terms  of  the  ‘world’  and  Others  or  in  terms  of  its
ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.(2)  The  possibility  just  mentioned  means
that Dasein discloses itself to itself in and as its ownmost potentiality-for-
Being.  This  authentic  disclosedness  shows  the  phenomenon  of  the  most
primordial  truth  in  the  mode  of  authenticity.  The  most  primordial,  and
indeed the most authentic, disclosedness in which Dasein, as a potentiality-
for-Being, can be, is the truth of existence.  This  becomes existentially and
ontologically  definite  only  in  connection  with  the  analysis  of  Dasein’s
authenticity.
 

1. ‘In ihr enthüllt sich, dass Dasein je schon als meines und dieses in einer bestimmten Welt und

bei einem bestimmten Umkreis von bestimmten innerweltlichen Seienden ist.’

2.  ‘…der  Entwurf:  das  erschliessende  Sein  zu  seinem  Seinkönnen.  Dasein  kann  sich  als
verstehendes aus der “Welt” und den Anderen her verstehen oder aus seinem eigensten Seinkönnen.’
The earlier editions have a full stop after ‘Entwurf’ rather than a colon, and introduce ‘das’ with a
capital. The grammatical function of ‘als verstehendes’ seems ambiguous.

H. 222

 

(4)  To  Dasein’s  state  of  Being  belongs  falling.  Proximally  and  for  the
most  part  Dasein  is  lost  in  its  ‘world’.  Its  understanding,  as  a  projection
upon possibilities of Being, has diverted itself thither. Its absorption in the
“they”  signifies  that  it  is  dominated  by  the  way  things  are  publicly
interpreted. That which has been uncovered and disclosed stands in a mode
in  which  it  has  been  disguised  and  closed  off  by  idle  talk,  curiosity,  and
ambiguity. Being towards entities has not been extinguished, but it has been
uprooted. Entities have not been completely hidden; they are precisely the
sort of thing that has been uncovered, but at the same time they have been
disguised. They show themselves, but in the mode of semblance. Likewise
what has formerly been uncovered sinks back again, hidden and disguised.
Because Dasein is essentially falling, its state of Being is such that it is in
‘untruth’. This term, like the expression ‘falling’, is here used ontologically.
If  we  are  to  use  it  in  existential  analysis,  we  must  avoid  giving  it  any
ontically negative ‘evaluation’. To be closed off and covered up belongs to
Dasein’s facticity. In its full existential-ontological meaning, the proposition
that  ‘Dasein  is  in  the  truth’  states  equiprimordially  that  ‘Dasein  is  in
untruth’.  But  only  in  so  far  as  Dasein  has  been  disclosed  has  it  also  been
closed  off;  and  only  in  so  far  as  entities  within-the-world  have  been
uncovered along with Dasein, have such entities, as possibly encounterable
within-the-world, been covered up (hidden) or disguised.

It  is  therefore  essential  that  Dasein  should  explicitly  appropriate  what
has already been uncovered, defend it against semblance and disguise, and
assure  itself  of  its  uncoveredness  again  and  again.  The  uncovering  of
anything  new  is  never  done  on  the  basis  of  having  something  completely
hidden,  but  takes  its  departure  rather  from  uncoveredness  in  the  mode  of
semblance.  Entities  look  as  if...  That  is,  they  have,  in  a  certain  way,  been
uncovered already, and yet they are still disguised.

Truth  (uncoveredness)  is  something  that  must  always  first  be  wrested
from  entities.  Entities  get  snatched  out  of  their  hiddenness.  The  factical
uncoveredness  of  anything  is  always,  as  it  were,  a  kind  of  robbery.  Is  it
accidental  that  when  the  Greeks  express  themselves  as  to  the  essence  of
truth, they use a privative expression—ἀ-λήθεια? When Dasein so expresses
itself, does not a primordial understanding of its own Being thus make itself

known—the understanding (even if it is only pre-ontological) that Being-in-
untruth makes up an essential characteristic of Being-in-the-world?

The goddess of Truth who guides Parmenides, puts two pathways before
him, one of uncovering, one of hiding; but this signifies nothing else than
that  Dasein  is  already  both  in  the  truth  and  in  untruth.  The  way  of
uncovering  is  achieved  only  in  κρίνειν  λόγῳ—in  distinguishing  between
these understandingly, and making one’s decision for the one rather than the
other.(xxxix)
 

xxxix.  Karl  Reinhardt  (Cf.  his  Parmenides  und  die  Geschichte  der  grieschischen  Philosophie,
1916)  was  the  first  to  conceptualize  and  solve  the  hackneyed  problem  of  how  the  two  parts  of
Parmenides’ poem are connected, though he did not explicitly point out the ontological foundation
for the connection between ἀλήθεια and δόξα, or its necessity.

H. 223

 

The existential-ontological condition for the fact that Being-in-the-world
is characterized by ‘truth’ and ‘untruth’, lies in that state of Dasein’s Being
which  we  have  designated  as  thrown  projection.  This  is  something  that  is
constitutive for the structure of care.

The  upshot  of  our  existential-ontological 

the
phenomenon  of  truth  is  (1)  that  truth,  in  the  most  primordial  sense,  is
Dasein’s  disclosedness,  to  which  the  uncoveredness  of  entities  within-the-
world belongs; and (2) that Dasein is equiprimordially both in the truth and
in untruth.

Interpretation  of 

that 

Within the horizon of the traditional Interpretation of the phenomenon of
truth,  our  insight  into  these  principles  will  not  be  complete  until  it  can  be
truth,  understood  as  agreement,  originates  from
shown:  (1) 
disclosedness  by  way  of  definite  modification;  (2) that  the  kind  of  Being
which belongs to disclosedness itself is such that its derivative modification
first comes into view and leads the way for the theoretical explication of the
structure of truth.

Assertion  and  its  structure  (namely,  the  apophantical  “as”)  are  founded
upon interpretation and its structure (viz, the hermeneutical “as”) and also
upon  understanding—upon  Dasein’s  disclosedness.  Truth,  however,  is
regarded as a distinctive character of assertion as so derived. Thus the roots
of  the  truth  of  assertion  reach  back  to  the  disclosedness  of  the
understanding.(xl) But over and above these indications of how the truth of

assertion  has  originated,  the  phenomenon  of  agreement  must  now  be
exhibited explicitly in its derivative character.
 

xl. Cf. Section 33 above, H. 153 ff. (‘Assertion as a derivative mode of interpretation.’)

H. 224

 

Our  Being  alongside  entities  within-the-world  is  concern,  and  this  is
Being  which  uncovers.  To  Dasein’s  disclosedness,  however,  discourse
belongs  essentially.(xli)  Dasein  expresses  itself  [spricht  sich  aus]:  it
expresses  itself  as  a  Being-towards  entities—a  Being-towards  which
uncovers.  And  in  assertion  it  expresses  itself  as  such  about  entities  which
have been uncovered. Assertion communicates entities in the “how” of their
uncoveredness. When Dasein is aware of the communication, it brings itself
in  its  awareness  into  an  uncovering  Being-towards  the  entities  discussed.
The assertion which is expressed is about something, and in what it is about
[in  ihrem  Worüber]  it  contains  the  uncoveredness  of  these  entities.  This
uncoveredness  is  preserved  in  what  is  expressed.  What  is  expressed
becomes, as it were, something ready-to-hand  within-the-world  which can
be  taken  up  and  spoken  again.(1)  Because  the  uncoveredness  has  been
preserved,  that  which  is  expressed  (which  thus  is  ready-to-hand)  has  in
itself  a  relation  to  any  entities  about  which  it  is  an  assertion.  Any
uncoveredness  is  an  uncoveredness  of  something.  Even  when  Dasein
speaks  over  again  what  someone  else  has  said,  it  comes  into  a  Being-
towards  the  very  entities  which  have  been  discussed.(2)  But  it  has  been
exempted  from  having  to  uncover  them  again,  primordially,  and  it  holds
that it has been thus exempted.
 

xli. Cf. Section 34, H. 160 ff.

 

1. ‘Das Ausgesprochene wird gleichsam zu einem innerweltlich Zuhandenen, das aufgenommen
und  weitergesprochen  werden  kann.’  While  we  have  followed  our  usual  policy  in  translating  ‘das
Ausgesprochene’ as ‘what is expressed’, it might perhaps be translated as ‘that which is spoken out’,
‘the utterance’, or even ‘the pronouncement’.

2.  “Auch  im  Nachsprechen  kommt  das  nachsprechende  Dasein  in  ein  Sein  zum  besprochenen

Seienden selbst.’

Dasein  need  not  bring  itself  face  to  face  with  entities  themselves  in  an
‘original’ experience; but it nevertheless remains in a Being-towards these

entities.  In  a  large  measure  uncoveredness  gets  appropriated  not  by  one’s
own  uncovering,  but  rather  by  hearsay  of  something  that  has  been  said.
Absorption  in  something  that  has  been  said  belongs  to  the  kind  of  Being
which  the  “they”  possesses.  That  which  has  been  expressed  as  such  takes
over  Being-towards  those  entities  which  have  been  uncovered  in  the
assertion.  If,  however,  these  entities  are  to  be  appropriated  explicitly  with
regard to their uncoveredness, this amounts to saying that the assertion is to
be  demonstrated  as  one  that  uncovers.  But  the  assertion  expressed  is
something  ready-to-hand,  and  indeed  in  such  a  way  that,  as  something  by
which  uncoveredness  is  preserved,  it  has  in  itself  a  relation  to  the  entities
uncovered. Now to demonstrate that it is something which uncovers [ihres
Entdeckend-seins]  means  to  demonstrate  how  the  assertion  by  which  the
uncoveredness  is  preserved  is  related  to  these  entities.  The  assertion  is
something  ready-to-hand.  The  entities  to  which  it  is  related  as  something
that uncovers, are either ready-to-hand or present-at-hand within-the-world.
The  relation  itself  presents  itself  thus,  as  one  that  is  present-at-hand.  But
this relation lies in the fact that the uncoveredness preserved in the assertion
is in each case an uncoveredness  o f   something. The  judgment  ‘contains
something  which  holds  for  the  objects’  (Kant).  But  the  relation  itself  now
acquires  the  character  of  presence-at-hand  by  getting  switched  over  to  a
relationship between things which are  present-at-hand.  The uncoveredness
of something becomes the present-at-hand conformity of one thing which is
present-at-hand—the  assertion  expressed—to  something  else  which  is
present-at-hand—the entity under discussion. And if this conformity is seen
only as a relationship between things which are present-at-hand—that is, if
the  kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to  the  terms  of  this  relationship  has  not
been discriminated and is understood as something merely present-at-hand
—then  the  relation  shows  itself  as  an  agreement  of  two  things  which  are
present-at-hand, an agreement which is present-at-hand itself.

H. 225

 

When the assertion has been expressed, the uncoveredness of the entity
moves  into  the  kind  of  Being  of  that  which  is  ready-to-hand  within-the-
world.(1)  But  now  to  the  extent  that  in  this  uncoveredness,  as  an
uncoveredness  o f  something, a relationship to something present-at-hand
persists,  the  uncoveredness  (truth)  becomes,  for  its  part,  a  relationship

between things which are present-at-hand (i n t e l l e c t u s  and  r e s)—a
relationship that is present-at-hand itself.
 

1. ‘Die Entdecktheit des Seienden rückt mit der Ausgesprochenheit der Aussage in die Seinsart

des innerweltlich Zuhandenen.’

Though  it  is  founded  upon  Dasein’s  disclosedness,  the  existential
phenomenon  of  uncoveredness  becomes  a  property  which  is  present-at-
hand  but  in  which  there  still  lurks  a  relational  character;  and  as  such  a
property, it gets broken asunder into a relationship which is present-at-hand.
Truth as disclosedness and as a Being-towards uncovered entities—a Being
which  itself  uncovers—has  become  truth  as  agreement  between  things
which are present-at-hand within-the-world. And thus we have pointed out
the ontologically derivative character of the traditional conception of truth.

Yet that which is last in the order of the way things are connected in their
foundations  existentially  and  ontologically,  is  regarded  ontically  and
factically as that which is first and closest to us. The necessity of this Fact,
however,  is  based  in  turn  upon  the  kind  of  Being  which  Dasein  itself
possesses. Dasein, in  its concernful  absorption,  understands itself in  terms
of what it encounters within-the-world.  The  uncoveredness which belongs
to  uncovering,  is  something  that  we  come  across  proximally  within-the-
world  in  that  which  has  been  expressed  [im  Ausgesprochenen].  Not  only
truth,  however, 
in  general  our
is  encountered  as  present-at-hand: 
understanding  of  Being  is  such  that  every  entity  is  understood  in  the  first
instance as present-at-hand. If the ‘truth’ which we encounter proximally in
an  ontical  manner  is  considered  ontologically  in  the  way  that  is  closest  to
us,  then  the  λόγος  (the  assertion)  gets  understood  as  λόγος  τινός—as  an
assertion    a  b  o  u  t    something,  an  uncoveredness  of  something;  but  the
phenomenon  gets  Interpreted  as  something  present-at-hand  with  regard  to
its  possible  presence-at-hand.(1)  Yet  because  presence-at-hand  has  been
equated with the meaning of Being in general, the question of whether this
kind  of  Being  of  truth  is  a  primordial  one,  and  whether  there  is  anything
primordial  in  that  structure  of  it  which  we  encounter  as  closest  to  us,  can
not come alive at all. The primordial phenomenon of truth has been covered
up  by  Dasein’s  very  understanding  of  Being—that  understanding  which  is
proximally  the  one  that  prevails,  and  which  even  today  has  not  been
surmounted explicitly and in principle.

At the same time, however, we must not overlook the fact that while this
way of understanding Being (the way which is closest to us) is one which
the  Greeks  were  the  first  to  develop  as  a  branch  of  knowledge  and  to
master,  the  primordial  understanding  of  truth  was  simultaneously  alive
among them, even if pre-ontologically, and it even held its own against the
concealment implicit in their ontology—at least in Aristotle.(xlii)
 

xlii. Cf. Aristotle, Ethica Nicomachea Z and Metaphysica Θ 10.

1. ‘…interpretiert aber das Phänomen als Vorhandenes auf seine mögliche Vorhandenheit.’

 

 

H. 226

Aristotle never defends the thesis that the primordial ‘locus’ of truth is in
the judgment. He says rather that the λόγος is that way of Being in which
Dasein  can  either uncover or  cover  up.  This  double  possibility  is  what  is
distinctive  in  the  Being-true  of  the  λόγος:  the  λόγος  is  that  way  of
comporting oneself which can also cover things up. And because  Aristotle
never upheld the thesis we have mentioned, he was also never in a situation
to ‘broaden’ the conception of truth in the λόγος to include pure νοεῖν. The
truth  of  αἴσθησις  and  of  the  seeing  of  ‘ideas’  is  the  primordial  kind  of
uncovering. And only because νόησις primarily uncovers, can the λόγος as
διανοεῖν also have uncovering as its function.

Not  only  is  it  wrong  to  invoke  Aristotle  for  the  thesis  that  the  genuine
‘locus’ of truth lies in the judgment; even in its content this thesis fails to
recognize the structure of truth. Assertion is not the primary ‘locus’ of truth.
On the contrary, whether as a mode in which uncoveredness is appropriated
or  as  a  way  of  Being-in-the-world,  assertion  is  grounded  in  Dasein’s
uncovering, or rather in its disclosedness. The most primordial ‘truth’ is the
‘locus’  of  assertion;  it  is  the  ontological  condition  for  the  possibility  that
assertions can be either true or false—that they may uncover or cover things
up.

Truth,  understood  in  the  most  primordial  sense,  belongs  to  the  basic
constitution of Dasein. The term signifies an existentiale. But herewith we
have  already  sketched  out  our  answers  to  the  question  of  what  kind  of
Being truth possesses, and to the question of in what sense it is necessary to
presuppose that ‘there is truth’.

(c) The Kind of Being which Truth Possesses, and the Presupposition

of Truth
 

H. 227

 

Dasein,  as  constituted  by  disclosedness,  is  essentially  in  the  truth.
Disclosedness  is  a  kind  of  Being  which  is  essential  to  Dasein.  ‘There  is’
truth only in so far as Dasein  i s  and so long as Dasein  i s. Entities  are
uncovered  only  when  Dasein  is;  and  only  as  long  as  Dasein  is,  are  they
disclosed. Newton’s laws, the principle of contradiction, any truth whatever
—these  are  true  only  as  long  as  Dasein  is.  Before  there  was  any  Dasein,
there  was  no  truth;  nor  will  there  be  any  after  Dasein  is  no  more.  For  in
such a case truth as disclosedness, uncovering, and uncoveredness, cannot
be. Before Newton’s laws were discovered, they were not ‘true’; it does not
follow  that  they  were  false,  or  even  that  they  would  become  false  if
ontically no discoveredness were any longer possible. Just as little does this
‘restriction’  imply  that  the  Being-true  of  ‘truths’  has  in  any  way  been
diminished.

To  say  that  before  Newton  his  laws  were  neither  true  nor  false,  cannot
signify that before him there were no such entities as have been uncovered
and pointed out by those laws. Through Newton the laws became true; and
with  them,  entities  became  accessible  in  themselves  to  Dasein.  Once
entities  have  been  uncovered,  they  show  themselves  precisely  as  entities
which  beforehand  already  were.  Such  uncovering  is  the  kind  of  Being
which belongs to ‘truth’.

That  there  are  ‘eternal  truths’  will  not  be  adequately  proved  until
someone has succeeded in demonstrating that Dasein has been and will be
for  all  eternity.  As  long  as  such  a  proof  is  still  outstanding,  this  principle
remains  a  fanciful  contention  which  does  not  gain  in  legitimacy  from
having philosophers commonly ‘believe’ it.

Because the kind of Being that is essential to truth is of the character of
Dasein,  all  truth  is  relative  to  Dasein’s  Being.  Does  this  relativity  signify
that  all  truth  is  ‘subjective’?  If  one  Interprets  ‘subjective’  as  ‘left  to  the
subject’s discretion’, then it certainly does not. For uncovering, in the sense
which  is  most  its  own,  takes  asserting  out  of  the  province  of  ‘subjective’
discretion,  and  brings  the  uncovering  Dasein  face  to  face  with  the  entities
themselves.  And  only  because  ‘truth’,  as  uncovering,  is  a  kind  of  Being

which  belongs  to  Dasein, can  it  be  taken  out  of  the  province  of  Dasein’s
discretion. Even the ‘universal validity’ of truth is rooted solely in the fact
that Dasein can uncover entities in themselves and free them. Only so can
these entities in themselves be binding for every possible assertion—that is,
for  every  way  of  pointing  them  out.(1)  If  truth  has  been  correctly
understood, is it in the least impaired by the fact that it is ontically possible
only  in  the  ‘subject’  and  that  it  stands  and  falls  with  the  Being  of  that
‘subject’?
 

1.  ‘Auch  die  “Allgemeingültigkeit”  der  Wahrheit  ist  lediglich  verwurzelt,  dass  das  Dasein
Seiendes an ihm selbst entdecken und freigeben kann. Nur so vermag dieses Seiende an ihm selbst
jede mögliche Aussage, das heisst Aufzeigung seiner, zu binden.’

H. 228

 

Now  that  we  have  an  existential  conception  of  the  kind  of  Being  that
belongs  to  truth,  the  meaning  of  “presupposing  the  truth”  also  becomes
intelligible.  Why  must  we  presuppose  that  there  is  truth?  What  is
‘presupposing’?  What  do  we  have  in  mind  with  the  ‘must’  and  the  ‘we’?
What  does  it  mean  to  say  ‘there  is  truth’?  ‘We’  presuppose  truth  because
‘we’, being in the kind of Being which Dasein possesses, are ‘in the truth’.
We do not presuppose it as something ‘outside’ us and ‘above’ us, towards
which,  along  with  other  ‘values’,  we  comport  ourselves.  It  is  not  we  who
presuppose ‘truth’; but it is ‘truth’ that makes it at all possible ontologically
for  us  to  be  able  to  be such  that  we  ‘presuppose’  anything  at  all.  Truth  is
what first makes possible anything like presupposing.

What does it mean to ‘presuppose’? It is to understand something as the
ground for the Being of some other entity. Such understanding of an entity
in  its  interconnections  of  Being,  is  possible  only  on  the  ground  of
disclosedness—that  is,  on  the  ground  of  Dasein’s  Being  something  which
uncovers.  Thus  to  presuppose  ‘truth’  means  to  understand  it  as  something
for  the  sake of which Dasein  i s. But Dasein is  already ahead of itself in
each  case;  this  is  implied  in  its  state-of-Being  as  care.  It  is  an  entity  for
which,  in  its  Being,  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being  is  an  issue.  To
Dasein’s  Being  and  its  potentiality-for-Being  as  Being-in-the-world,
disclosedness and uncovering belong essentially. To Dasein its potentiality-
for-Being-in-the-world  is  an  issue,  and  this  includes(1)  concerning  itself
with  entities  within-the-world  and  uncovering  them  circumspectively.  In

Dasein’s  state-of-Being  as  care,  in  Being-ahead-of-itself,  lies  the  most
primordial  ‘presupposing’.  Because  this  presupposing  of  itself  belongs  to
Dasein’s  Being,  ‘we’  must  also  presuppose  ‘ourselves’  as  having  the
attribute of disclosedness. There are also entities with a character other than
that of Dasein, but the ‘presupposing’ which lies in Dasein’s Being does not
relate itself to these; it relates itself solely to Dasein itself. The truth which
has been presupposed, or the ‘there is’ by which its Being is to be defined,
has  that  kind  of  Being—or  meaning  of  Being—which  belongs  to  Dasein
itself. We must ‘make’ the presupposition of truth because it is one that has
been ‘made’ already with the Being of the ‘we’.

We must presuppose truth. Dasein itself, as in each case  m y  Dasein and
  t  h  i  s    Dasein,  must  be;  and  in  the  same  way  the  truth,  as  Daseins
disclosedness, must be. This  belongs to  Dasein’s essential  thrownness  into
the world. Has Dasein as itself ever decided freely whether it wants to come
into ‘Dasein’ or not, and will it ever be able to make such a decision? ‘In
itself’  it  is  quite  incomprehensible  why  entities  are  to  be  uncovered,  why
truth  and  Dasein  must  be.  The  usual  refutation  of  that  scepticism  which
denies either the Being of ‘truth’ or its cognizability, stops half way. What it
shows,  as  a  formal  argument,  is  simply  that  if  anything  gets  judged,  truth
has been presupposed. This suggests that ‘truth’ belongs to assertion—that
pointing  something  out  is,  by  its  very  meaning,  an  uncovering.  But  when
one says this, one has to clarify why that in which there lies the ontological
ground for this necessary connection between assertion and truth as regards
their  Being,  must  be  as  it  is.  The  kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to  truth  is
likewise  left  completely  obscure,  and  so  is  the  meaning  of  presupposing,
and that of its ontological  foundation  in  Dasein itself. Moreover,  one here
fails  to  recognize  that  even  when  nobody  judges,  truth  already  gets
presupposed in so far as Dasein  i s  at all.

H. 229

 

A sceptic can no more be refuted than the Being of truth can be ‘proved’.
And if any sceptic of the kind who denies the truth, factically is, he does not
even need  to  be  refuted.  In  so  far  as  he  is,  and  has  understood  himself  in
this  Being,  he  has  obliterated  Dasein  in  the  desperation  of  suicide;  and  in
doing  so,  he  has  also  obliterated  truth.  Because  Dasein,  for  its  own  part,
cannot  first  be  subjected  to  proof,  the  necessity  of  truth  cannot  be  proved

either.  It  has  no  more  been  demonstrated  that  there  ever  has  ‘been’  an
‘actual’ sceptic(2) (though  this is  what has at  bottom  been believed  in  the
refutations of scepticism, in spite of what these undertake to do) than it has
been  demonstrated  that  there  are  any  ‘eternal  truths’.  But  perhaps  such
sceptics  have  been  more  frequent  than  one  would  innocently  like  to  have
true when one tries to bowl over ‘scepticism’ by formal dialectics.
 

1. Reading ‘und darin’ with the newer editions. The older editions have ‘d.h. u.a.’
2.  ‘…dass  es  je...  einen  “wirklichen”  Skeptiker  “gegeben”  hat.’  The  older  editions  have  ‘nie’

(‘never’) instead of ‘je’ (‘ever’).

Thus  with  the  question  of  the  Being  of  truth  and  the  necessity  of
presupposing  it,  just  as  with  the  question  of  the  essence  of  knowledge,  an
‘ideal  subject’  has  generally  been  posited.  The  motive  for  this,  whether
explicit or tacit, lies in the requirement that philosophy should have the ‘a
priori’  as  its  theme,  rather  than  ‘empirical  facts’  as  such.  There  is  some
justification  for  this  requirement,  though  it  still  needs  to  be  grounded
ontologically.  Yet  is  this  requirement  satisfied  by  positing  an  ‘ideal
subject’?  Is  not  such  a  subject  a  fanciful  idealization?  With  such  a
conception  have  we  not  missed  precisely  the  a  priori  character  of  that
merely  ‘factual’  subject,  Dasein?  Is  it  not  an  attribute  of  the  a  priori
character  of  the  factical  subject  (that  is,  an  attribute  of  Dasein’s  facticity)
that it is in the truth and in untruth equiprimordially?

The ideas of a ‘pure “I” ’and of a ‘consciousness in general’ are so far
from  including  the  a  priori  character  of  ‘actual’  subjectivity  that  the
ontological characters of Dasein’s facticity and its state of Being are either
passed over or not seen at all. Rejection of a ‘consciousness in general’ does
not  signify  that  the  a priori is  negated,  any  more  than  the  positing  of  an
idealized subject guarantees that Dasein has an a priori character grounded
upon fact.

Both  the  contention  that  there  are  ‘eternal  truths’  and  the  jumbling
together  of  Dasein’s  phenomenally  grounded  ‘ideality’  with  an  idealized
absolute  subject,  belong  to  those  residues  of  Christian  theology  within
philosophical problematics which have not as yet been radically extruded.

H. 230

 

The  Being  of  truth  is  connected  primordially  with  Dasein.  And  only
because  Dasein    i  s    as  constituted  by  disclosedness  (that  is,  by
understanding),  can  anything  like  Being  be  understood;  only  so  is  it
possible to understand Being.

Being (not entities) is something which ‘there is’ only in so far as truth
is. And truth is only in so far as and as long as Dasein is. Being and truth
‘are’ equiprimordially. What does it signify that Being ‘is’, where Being is
to  be  distinguished  from  every  entity?  One  can  ask  this  concretely  only  if
the meaning of Being and the full scope of the understanding of Being have
in general been clarified. Only then can one also analyse primordially what
belongs to the concept of a science of Being as such, and to its possibilities
and its variations. And in demarcating this research and its truth, the kind of
research in which entities are uncovered, and its accompanying truth, must
be defined ontologically.

The answer to the question of the meaning of Being has yet to be given
[steht...  aus].  What  has  our  fundamental  analysis  of  Dasein,  as  we  have
carried  it  out  so  far,  contributed  to  working  out  this  question?  By  laying
bare  the  phenomenon  of  care,  we  have  clarified  the  state  of  Being  of  that
entity  to  whose  Being  something  like  an  understanding  of  Being  belongs.
At  the  same  time  the  Being  of  Dasein  has  thus  been  distinguished  from
modes  of  Being  (readiness-to-hand,  presence-at-hand,  Reality)  which
characterize  entities  with  a  character  other 
that  of  Dasein.
Understanding  has  itself  been  elucidated;  and  at  the  same  time  the
methodological  transparency  of  the  procedure  of  Interpreting  Being  by
understanding it and interpreting it, has thus been guaranteed.

than 

If in care we have arrived at Dasein’s primordial state of Being, then this
must  also  be  the  basis  for  conceptualizing  that  understanding  of  Being
which lies in care; that is to say, it must be possible to define the meaning of
Being.  But  is  the  phenomenon  of  care  one  in  which  the  most  primordial
existential-ontological  state  of  Dasein  is  disclosed?  And  has  the  structural
manifoldness  which  lies  in  this  phenomenon,  presented  us  with  the  most
primordial  totality  of  factical  Dasein’s  Being?  Has  our  investigation  up  to
this point ever brought Dasein into view as a whole?

 

 

 

DIVISION TWO: DASEIN AND TEMPORALITY

1. ‘Dasein und Zeitlichkeit’. In this heading and in others which follow in this Division, we have
capitalized such words as ‘temporal’ and ‘constitution’ in accordance with normal practice in titles,
even when this violates the orthographic conventions of our translation.

45. The Outcome of the Preparatory Fundamental Analysis of Dasein,

and the Task of a Primordial Existential Interpretation of this Entity
 

H. 231

WHAT have we gained by our preparatory analysis of Dasein, and what
are we seeking? In Being-in-the-world, whose essential structures centre in
disclosedness, we have found the basic state of the entity we have taken as
our  theme.  The  totality  of  Being-in-the-world  as  a  structural  whole  has
revealed  itself  as  care.  In  care  the  Being  of  Dasein  is  included.  When  we
came  to  analyse  this  Being,  we  took  as  our  clue  existence(i),  which,  in
anticipation,  we  had  designated  as  the  essence  of  Dasein.  This  term
“existence”  formally 
is  as  an  understanding
potentiality-for-Being,  which,  in  its  Being,  makes  an  issue  of  that  Being
itself.  In  every  case,  I  myself  am  the  entity  which  is  in  such  a  manner
[dergestalt seiend]. By working out the phenomenon of care, we have given
ourselves an insight into the concrete constitution of existence—that is, an
insight  into  its  equiprimordial  connection  with  Dasein’s  facticity  and  its
falling.

that  Dasein 

indicates 

What we are seeking is the answer to the question about the meaning of
Being  in  general,  and,  prior  to  that,  the  possibility  of  working  out  in  a
radical  manner  this  basic  question  of  all  ontology.  But  to  lay  bare  the
horizon within which something like Being in general becomes intelligible,
is  tantamount  to  clarifying  the  possibility  of  having  any  understanding  of
Being  at  all—an  understanding  which  itself  belongs  to  the  constitution  of
the  entity  called  Dasein.(ii)  The  understanding  of  Being,  however,  cannot

be radically clarified  as an essential  element in  Dasein’s Being,  unless the
entity to whose Being it belongs, has been Interpreted primordially in itself
with regard to its Being.

Are we entitled to the claim that in characterizing Dasein ontologically
qua care we have given a primordial Interpretation of this entity? By what
criterion  is  the  existential  analytic  of  Dasein  to  be  assessed  as  regards  its
primordiality,  or  the  lack  of  it?  What,  indeed,  do  we  mean  by  the
“primordiality” of an ontological Interpretation?
 

i. Cf. Section 9, H. 41 ff.
ii. Cf. Section 6, H. 19 ff.; Section 21, H. 95 ff.; Section 43, H. 201.

H. 232

 

Ontological  investigation  is  a  possible  kind  of  interpreting,  which  we
have  described  as  the  working-out  and  appropriation  of  an  understanding.
(iii)  Every  interpretation  has  its  fore-having,  its  fore-sight,  and  its  fore-
conception. If such an interpretation, as Interpretation, becomes an explicit
task for research, then the totality of these ‘presuppositions’ (which we call
the  “hermeneutical  Situation”)  needs  to  be  clarified  and  made  secure
beforehand, both in a basic experience of the ‘object’ to be disclosed, and in
terms of such an experience. In ontological Interpretation an entity is to be
laid  bare  with  regard  to  its  own  state  of  Being;  such  an  Interpretation
obliges us first to give a phenomenal characterization of the entity we have
taken as our theme, and thus to bring it into the scope of our fore-having,
with which all the subsequent steps of our analysis are to conform. But at
the  same  time  these  steps  need  to  be  guided  by  whatever  fore-sight  is
possible  as  to  the  kind  of  Being  which  the  entity  may  possess.  Our  fore-
having and our fore-sight will then give us at the same time a sketch of that
way of conceiving (or fore-conception) to the level of which all structures
of Being are to be raised.

If, however, the ontological Interpretation is to be a primordial one, this
not  only  demands  that  in  general  the  hermeneutical  Situation  shall  be  one
which  has  been  made  secure  in  conformity  with  the  phenomena;  it  also
requires explicit assurance that the whole of the entity which it has taken as
its theme has been brought into the fore-having. Similarly, it is not enough
just to make a first sketch of the Being of this entity, even if our sketch is

grounded  in  the  phenomena.  If  we  are  to  have  a  fore-sight  of  Being,  we
must see it in such a way as not to miss the unity of those structural items
which  belong  to  it  and  are  possible.  Only  then  can  the  question  of  the
meaning of the unity which belongs to the whole entity’s totality of Being,
be formulated and answered with any phenomenal assurance.

Has the existential analysis of Dasein which we have carried out, arisen
from  such  a  hermeneutical  Situation  as  will  guarantee  the  primordiality
which fundamental ontology demands? Can we progress from the result we
have  obtained—that  the  being  of  Dasein  is  care—to  the  question  of  the
primordial unity of this structural whole?
 

iii. Cf. Section 32, H. 148 ff.

H. 233

 

What is the status of the fore-sight by which our ontological procedure
has  hitherto  been  guided?  We  have  defined  the  idea  of  existence  as  a
potentiality-for-Being—a potentiality which understands, and for which its
own  Being  is  an  issue.  But  this  potentiality-for-Being,  as  one  which  is  in
each case mine, is  free  either  for  authenticity  or for  inauthenticity or for  a
mode in which neither of these has been differentiated.(iv) In starting with
average  everydayness,  our  Interpretation  has  heretofore  been  confined  to
the analysis of such existing as is either undifferentiated or inauthentic. Of
course even along this path, it was possible and indeed necessary to reach a
concrete determination  of the  existentiality of existence. Nevertheless, our
ontological  characterization  of  the  constitution  of  existence  still  lacked
something  essential.  “Existence”  means  a  potentiality-for-Being—but  also
one which is authentic. As long as the existential structure of an authentic
potentiality-for-Being  has  not  been  brought  into  the  idea  of  existence,  the
fore-sight  by  which  an  existential  Interpretation  is  guided  will  lack
primordiality.

And  how  about  what  we  have  had  in  advance  in  our  hermeneutical
Situation  hitherto?  How  about  its  fore-having?  When  and  how  has  our
existential  analysis  received  any  assurance 
that  by  starting  with
everydayness,  it  has  forced  the  whole  of  Dasein—this  entity  from  its
‘beginning’  to  its  ‘end’—into  the  phenomenological  view  which  gives  us
our  theme?  We  have  indeed  contended  that  care  is  the  totality  of  the

structural  whole  of  Dasein’s  constitution.(v)  But  have  we  not  at  the  very
outset  of  our  Interpretation  renounced  the  possibility  of  bringing  Dasein
into  view  as  a  whole?  Everydayness  is  precisely  that  Being  which  is
‘between’ birth and death. And if existence is definitive for Dasein’s Being
and  if  its  essence  is  constituted  in  part  by  potentiality-for-Being,  then,  as
long as Dasein exists, it must in each case, as such a potentiality, not yet be
something. Any entity whose Essence is made up of existence, is essentially
opposed to the possibility of our getting it in our grasp as an entity which is
a  whole.  Not  only  has  the  hermeneutical  Situation  hitherto  given  us  no
assurance  of  ‘having’  the  whole  entity:  one  may  even  question  whether
“having”  the  whole  entity  is  attainable  at  all,  and  whether  a  primordial
ontological Interpretation of Dasein will not founder on the kind of Being
which belongs to the very entity we have taken as our theme.

One  thing has become unmistakable: our existential  analysis  of  Dasein
up till now cannot lay claim to primordiality. Its fore-having never included
more  than  the  inauthentic  Being  of  Dasein,  and  of  Dasein  as  less  than  a
whole [als unganzes]. If  the  Interpretation  of Dasein’s Being  is  to  become
primordial, as a foundation for working out the basic question of ontology,
then it must first have brought to light existentially the Being of Dasein in
its possibilities of authenticity and totality.
 

iv. Cf. Section 9, H. 41 ff.
v. Cf. Section 41, H. 191 ff.

H. 234

 

Thus  arises  the  task  of  putting  Dasein  as  a  whole  into  our  fore-having.
This  signifies,  however,  that  we  must  first  of  all  raise  the  question  of  this
entity’s  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole.  As  long  as  Dasein  is,  there  is  in
every  case  something  still  outstanding,  which  Dasein  can  be  and  will  be.
But to that which is thus outstanding, the ‘end’ itself belongs. The ‘end’ of
Being-in-the-world is death. This end, which belongs to the potentiality-for-
Being—that  is  to  say,  to  existence—limits  and  determines  in  every  case
whatever totality is possible for Dasein. If, however, Dasein’s Being-at-an-
end(1) in death, and therewith its Being-a-whole, are to be included in the
discussion of its possibly Being-a-whole, and if this is to be done in a way
which  is  appropriate  to  the  phenomena,  then  we  must  have  obtained  an

ontologically  adequate  conception  of  death—that  is  to  say  an  existential
conception of it. But as something of the character of Dasein, death is only
in  an  existentiell  Being  towards  death  [Sein  zum  Tode].  The  existential
structure of such Being proves to be the ontologically constitutive state of
Dasein’s  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole.  Thus  the  whole  existing  Dasein
allows itself to be brought into our existential fore-having. But can Dasein
also exist authentically as a whole? How is the authenticity of existence to
be determined at all, if not with regard to authentic existing? Where do we
get  our  criterion  for  this?  Manifestly,  Dasein  itself  must,  in  its  Being,
present  us  with  the  possibility  and  the  manner  of  its  authentic  existence,
unless such existence is something that can be imposed upon it ontically, or
ontologically fabricated. But an authentic potentiality-for-Being  is  attested
by the conscience. And conscience, as a phenomenon of Dasein, demands,
like  death,  a  genuinely  existential  Interpretation.  Such  an  Interpretation
leads  to  the  insight  that  Dasein  has  an  authentic  potentiality-for-Being  in
that  it  wants  to  have  a  conscience.  But  this  is  an  existentiell  possibility
which tends, from the very meaning of its Being, to be made definite in an
existentiell way by Being-towards-death.
 

1. ‘Zu-Ende-sein’. This expression is to be distinguished from ‘Sein-zum-Ende’, which we shall

translate as ‘Being-towards-the-end’.

By  pointing  out  that  Dasein  has  an  authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-
whole, the  existential  analytic  acquires  assurance  as  to  the  constitution  of
Dasein’s primordial Being. But at the same time the authentic potentiality-
for-Being-a-whole  becomes  visible  as  a  mode  of  care.  And  therewith  the
phenomenally  adequate  ground  for  a  primordial  Interpretation  of  the
meaning of Dasein’s Being has also been assured.

But  the  primordial  ontological  basis  for’  Dasein’s  existentiality  is
temporality.  In  terms  of  temporality,  the  articulated  structural  totality  of
Dasein’s  Being  as  care  first  becomes  existentially  intelligible.  The
Interpretation  of  the  meaning  of  Dasein’s  Being  cannot  stop  with  this
demonstration.  The  existential-temporal  analysis  of  this  entity  needs  to  be
confirmed  concretely.  We  must  go  back  and  lay  bare  in  their  temporal
meaning  the  ontological  structures  of  Dasein  which  we  have  previously
obtained. Everydayness reveals itself as a mode of temporality. But by thus
recapitulating  our  preparatory  fundamental  analysis  of  Dasein,  we  will  at
the same time make the phenomenon of temporality itself more transparent.

In terms of temporality, it then becomes intelligible why Dasein is, and can
be, historical in the basis of its Being, and why, as historical, it can develop
historiology.

H. 235

 

If temporality makes up the primordial meaning of Dasein’s Being, and
if moreover this entity is one for which, in its Being, this very Being is  an
issue,  then  care  must  use  ‘time’  and  therefore  must  reckon  with  ‘time’.
‘Time-reckoning’ is developed by Dasein’s temporality. The ‘time’ which is
experienced  in  such  reckoning  is  that  phenomenal  aspect  of  temporality
which is closest to us. Out of it arises the ordinary everyday understanding
of  time.  And  this  understanding  evolves  into  the  traditional  conception  of
time.

By  casting  light  on  the  source  of  the  ‘time’  ‘in  which’  entities  within-
the-world  are  encountered—time  as  “within-time-ness”—we  shall  make
manifest  an  essential  possibility  of  the  temporalizing  of  temporality.(1)
Therewith  the  understanding  prepares  itself  for  an  even  more  primordial
temporalizing  of  temporality.  In  this(2)  is  grounded  that  understanding  of
Being which is constitutive for the Being of Dasein. Within the horizon of
time the projection of a meaning of Being in general can be accomplished.

Thus  the  investigation  comprised  in  the  division  which  lies  before  us
will  now  traverse  the  following  stages:  Dasein’s  possibility  of  Being-a-
whole,  and  Being-towards-death  (Chapter  1);  Dasein’s  attestation  of  an
authentic  potentiality-for-Being,  and  resoluteness  (Chapter  2);  Dasein’s
authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole, and temporality as the ontological
meaning  of  care  (Chapter  3);  temporality  and  everydayness  (Chapter  4);
temporality and historicality (Chapter 5); temporality and within-time-ness
as the source of the ordinary conception of time (Chapter 6) .(vi)
 

vi. In the nineteenth century, Søren Kierkegaard explicitly seized upon the problem of existence
as  an  existentiell  problem,  and  thought  it  through  in  a  penetrating  fashion.  But  the  existential
problematic was so alien to him that, as regards his ontology, he remained completely dominated by
Hegel and by ancient philosophy as Hegel saw it. Thus, there is more to be learned philosophically
from his ‘edifying’ writings than from his theoretical ones—with the exception of his treatise on the
concept  of  anxiety.  [Here  Heidegger  is  referring  to  the  work  generally  known  in  English  as  The
Concept of Dread.—Tr.]
 

1.  ‘Die  Aufhellung  des  Ursprungs  der  “Zeit”,  “in  der”  innerweltliches  Seiendes  begegnet,  der
Zeit  als  Innerzeitigkeit,  offenbart  eine  wesenhafte  Zeitigungsmöglichkeit  der  Zeitlichkeit.’  On
‘zeitigen’ see H. 304 below.

2.  ‘In  ihr...’  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  pronoun  ‘ihr’  refers  to  ‘Zeitigung’  (‘temporalizing’)  or

‘Zeitlichkeit’ (‘temporality’).

I: DASEIN’S POSSIBILITY OF BEING-A-WHOLE, AND

BEING-TOWARDS-DEATH

 

 

46. The Seeming Impossibility of Getting Dasein’s Being-a-whole into

our Grasp Ontologically and Determining its Character
 

H. 236

THE  inadequacy  of  the  hermeneutical  Situation  from  which  the
preceding analysis of Dasein has arisen, must be surmounted. It is necessary
for us to bring the whole Dasein into our fore-having. We must accordingly
ask whether this entity, as something existing, can ever become accessible
in  its  Being-a-whole.  In  Dasein’s  very  state  of  Being,  there  are  important
reasons which seem to speak against the possibility of having it presented
[Vorgabe] in the manner required.

The possibility of this entity’s Being-a-whole is manifestly inconsistent
with  the  ontological  meaning  of  care,  and  care  is  that  which  forms  the
totality  of  Dasein’s  structural  whole.  Yet  the  primary  item  in  care  is  the
‘ahead-of-itself’,  and  this  means  that  in  every  case  Dasein  exists  for  the
sake of itself. ‘As long as it is’, right to its end, it comports itself towards its
potentiality-for-Being.  Even  when  it  still  exists  but  has  nothing  more
‘before  it’  and  has  ‘settled  [abgeschlossen]  its  account’,  its  Being  is  still
determined  by  the  ‘ahead-of-itself’.  Hopelessness,  for  instance,  does  not
tear Dasein away from its possibilities, but is only one of its own modes of
Being  towards these  possibilities.  Even  when  one  is  without  Illusions  and
‘is  ready  for  anything’  [“Gefasstsein  auf  Alles”],  here  too  the  ‘ahead-of-
itself’ lies hidden. The ‘ahead-of-itself’, as an item in the structure of care,
tells  us  unambiguously  that  in  Dasein  there  is  always  something  still
outstanding,(1) which, as a potentiality-for-Being for Dasein itself, has not
yet  become  ‘actual’.  It  is  essential  to  the  basic  constitution  of  Dasein  that
[eine  ständige
there 

is  constantly  something  still 

to  be  settled 

Unabgeschlossenheit].  Such  a  lack  of  totality  signifies  that  there  is
something still outstanding in one’s potentiality-for-Being.

1.  ‘…im  Dasein  immer  noch  etwas  aussteht...’  The  verb  ‘ausstehen’  and  the  noun  ‘Ausstand’
(which we usually translate as ‘something still outstanding’, etc.), are ordinarily used in German to
apply to a debt or a bank deposit which, from the point of view of the lender or depositor, has yet to
be repaid to him, liquidated, or withdrawn.

But  as  soon  as  Dasein  ‘exists’  in  such  a  way  that  absolutely  nothing
more  is  still  outstanding  in  it,  then  it  has  already  for  this  very  reason
become  “no-longer-Being-there” 
is
annihilated when what is still outstanding in its Being has been liquidated.
As  long  as  Dasein  is as  an  entity,  it  has  never  reached  its  ‘wholeness’.(1)
But if it gains such ‘wholeness’, this gain becomes the utter loss of Being-
in-the-world. In such a case, it can never again be experienced as an entity.

[Nicht-mehr-da-sein]. 

Its  Being 

in 

its  Being-a-whole,  does  not 

The  reason  for  the  impossibility  of  experiencing  Dasein  ontically  as  a
whole  which    i  s    [als  seiendes  Gauzes],  and  therefore  of  determining  its
in  any
character  ontologically 
imperfection of our cognitive powers. The hindrance lies rather in the Being
of  this  entity.  That  which  cannot  ever  be  such  as  any  experience  which
pretends  to  get  Dasein  in  its  grasp  would  claim,  eludes  in  principle  any
possibility  of  getting  experienced  at  all.(2)  But  in  that  case  is  it  not  a
hopeless  undertaking  to  try  to  discern  in  Dasein  its  ontological  totality  of
Being?
 

lie 

1. ‘Die Behebung des Seinsausstandes besagt Vernichtung seines Seins. Solange das Dasein als
Seiendes ist, hat es seine “Gänze” nie erreicht.’ The verb ‘beheben’ is used in the sense of closing
one’s account or liquidating it by withdrawing money from the bank. The noun ‘Gänze’, which we
shall translate as ‘wholeness’, is to be distinguished from ‘Ganze’ (‘whole’, or occasionally ‘totality’)
and ‘Ganzheit’ (‘totality’).

2. ‘Was so gar nicht erst sein kann, wie ein Erfahren das Dasein zu erfassen prätendiert, entzieht

sich grundsätzlich einer Erfahrbarkeit.’

H. 237

 

We  cannot  cross  out  the  ‘ahead-of-itself’  as  an  essential  item  in  the
structure of care. But how sound are the conclusions which we have drawn
from this? Has not the impossibility of getting the whole of Dasein into our
grasp  been  inferred  by  an  argument  which  is  merely  formal?  Or  have  we
not  at  bottom  inadvertently  posited  that  Dasein  is  something  present-at-
hand, ahead of which something that is not yet present-at-hand is constantly
shoving  itself?  Have  we,  in  our  argument,  taken  “Being-not-yet”  and  the

‘ahead’  in  a  sense  that  is  genuinely  existential? Has  our  talk  of  the  ‘end’
and ‘totality’ been phenomenally appropriate to Dasein? Has the expression
‘death’ had a biological  signification  or one that is  existential-ontological,
or indeed any signification that has been adequately and surely delimited?
Have we indeed exhausted all the possibilities for making Dasein accessible
in its wholeness?

We must answer these questions before the problem of Dasein’s totality
can  be  dismissed  as  nugatory  [nichtiges].  This  question—both  the
existentiell question of whether a potentiality-for-Being-a-whole is possible,
and the existential question of the state-of-Being of ‘end’ and ‘totality’—is
one  in  which  there  lurks  the  task  of  giving  a  positive  analysis  for  some
phenomena  of  existence  which  up  till  now  have  been  left  aside.  In  the
centre  of  these  considerations  we  have  the  task  of  characterizing
ontologically  Dasein’s  Being-at-an-end  and  of  achieving  an  existential
conception of death. The investigations relating to these topics are divided
up as follows:  the  possibility of experiencing the  death of Others,  and the
possibility of getting a whole Dasein into our grasp (Section 47); that which
is  still  outstanding,  the  end,  and  totality  (Section  48);  how  the  existential
analysis of death is distinguished from other possible Interpretations of this
phenomenon  (Section  49);  a  preliminary  sketch  of  the  existential-
ontological  structure  of  death  (Section  50);  Being-towards-death  and  the
everydayness  of  Dasein  (Section  51);  everyday  Being-towards-death,  and
the  full  existential  conception  of  death  (Section  52);  an  existential
projection of an authentic Being-towards-death (Section 53).

47.  The  Possibility  of  Experiencing  the  Death  of  Others,  and  the

Possibility of Getting a Whole Dasein into our Grasp
 

When Dasein reaches its wholeness in death, it simultaneously loses the
Being  of  its  “there”.  By  its  transition  to  no-longer-Dasein  [Nichtmehr-
dasein],  it  gets  lifted  right  out  of  the  possibility  of  experiencing  this
transition and of understanding it as something experienced. Surely this sort
of  thing  is  denied  to  any  particular  Dasein  in  relation  to  itself.  But  this
makes  the  death  of  Others  more  impressive.  In  this  way  a  termination
[Beendigung] of Dasein becomes ‘Objectively’ accessible. Dasein can thus
gain  an  experience  of  death,  all  the  more  so  because  Dasein  is  essentially

Being  with  Others.  In  that  case,  the  fact  that  death  has  been  thus
‘Objectively’  given  must  make  possible  an  ontological  delimitation  of
Dasein’s totality.

H. 238

 

Thus from the kind of Being which Dasein possesses as Being with one
another, we might draw the fairly obvious information that when the Dasein
of Others has come to an end, it might be chosen as a substitute theme for
our  analysis  of  Dasein’s  totality.  But  does  this  lead  us  to  our  appointed
goal?

Even the Dasein of Others, when it has reached its wholeness in death, is
no-longer-Dasein,  in  the  sense  of  Being-no-longer-in-the-world.  Does  not
dying  mean  going-out-of-the-world,  and  losing  one’s  Being-in-the-world?
Yet  when  someone  has  died,  his  Being-no-longer-in-the-world  (if  we
understand  it  in  an  extreme  way)  is  still  a  Being,  but  in  the  sense  of  the
Being-just-present-at-hand-and-no-more  of  a  corporeal  Thing  which  we
encounter.  In  the  dying  of  the  Other  we  can  experience  that  remarkable
phenomenon  of  Being  which  may  be  defined  as  the  change-over  of  an
entity from Dasein’s kind of Being (or life) to no-longer-Dasein. The end of
the  entity  qua  Dasein  is  the  beginning  of  the  same  entity  qua  something
present-at-hand.

However,  in  this  way  of  Interpreting  the  change-over  from  Dasein  to
Being-just-present-at-hand-and-no-more, the phenomenal content is missed,
inasmuch  as  in  the  entity  which  still  remains  we  are  not  presented  with  a
mere  corporeal  Thing.  From  a  theoretical  point  of  view,  even  the  corpse
which  is  present-at-hand  is  still  a  possible  object  for  the  student  of
pathological anatomy, whose understanding tends to be oriented to the idea
of life. This something which is just-present-at-hand-and-no-more is ‘more’
than a lifeless material Thing. In it we encounter something unalive, which
has lost its life.(1)

But  even  this  way  of  characterizing  that  which  still  remains  [des
Nochverbleibenden]  does  not  exhaust  the  full  phenomenal  findings  with
regard to Dasein.

The  ‘deceased’  [Der  “Verstorbene”]  as  distinct  from  the  dead  person
[dem  Gestorbenen],  has  been  torn  away  from  those  who  have  ‘remained
behind’ [den “Hinterbliebenen”], and is an object of ‘concern’ in the ways

of funeral rites, interment, and the cult of graves. And that is so because the
deceased,  in  his  kind  of  Being,  is  ‘still  more’  than  just  an  item  of
equipment,  environmentally  ready-to-hand,  about  which  one  can  be
their  mourning  and
concerned. 
commemoration, those who have remained behind are with him, in a mode
of  respectful  solicitude.  Thus  the  relationship-of-Being  which  one  has
towards  the  dead  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  concernful  Being-alongside
something ready-to-hand.

tarrying  alongside  him 

In 

in 

In  such  Being-with  the  dead  [dem  Toten],  the  deceased  himself  is  no
longer  factically  ‘there’.  However,  when  we  speak  of  “Being-with”,  we
always  have  in  view  Being  with  one  another  in  the  same  world.  The
deceased has abandoned our ‘world’ and left it behind. But in terms of that
world [Aus ihr her] those who remain can still be with him.

H. 239

 

the 

the 

dead, 

authentic 

The greater the phenomenal appropriateness with which we take the no-
longer-Dasein  of  the  deceased,  the  more  plainly  is  it  shown  that  in  such
Being-with 
Being-come-to-an-end
[Zuendegekommensein] of the deceased is precisely the sort of thing which
we do not experience.  Death does indeed reveal itself as a loss, but  a loss
such as is experienced by those who remain. In suffering this loss, however,
we have no way of access to the loss-of-Being as such which the dying man
‘suffers’.  The  dying  of  Others  is  not  something  which  we  experience  in  a
genuine sense; at most we are always just ‘there alongside’.(2)
 

1. ‘Das Nur-noch-Vorhandene ist “mehr” als ein lebloses materielles Ding. Mit ihm begegnet ein

des Lebens verlustig gegangenes Unlebendiges.’

2.  ‘…sind...  “dabei”.’  Literally  the  verb  ‘dabeisein’  means  simply  ‘to  be  at  that  place’,  ‘to  be
there alongside’; but it also has other connotations which give an ironical touch to this passage, for it
may also mean, ‘to be engaged in’ some activity, ‘to be at it’, ‘to be in the swim’, ‘to be ready to be
“counted in” ’.

And even if, by thus Being there alongside, it were possible and feasible
for us to make plain to ourselves ‘psychologically’ the dying of Others, this
would by no means let us grasp the way-to-be which we would then have in
mind—namely,  coming-to-an-end.  We  are  asking  about  the  ontological
meaning  of  the  dying  of  the  person  who  dies,  as  a  possibility-of-Being

which belongs to his Being. We are not asking about the way in which the
deceased has Dasein-with or is still-a-Dasein [Nochdaseins] with those who
are left behind. If death as experienced in Others is what we are enjoined to
take as the theme for our analysis of Dasein’s end and totality, this cannot
give us, either ontically or ontologically, what it presumes to give.

But  above  all,  the  suggestion  that  the  dying  of  Others  is  a  substitute
theme for the ontological analysis of Dasein’s totality and the settling of its
account, rests on a presupposition which demonstrably fails altogether(1) to
recognize Dasein’s kind of Being. This is what one presupposes when one
is of the opinion that any Dasein may be substituted for another at random,
so that what cannot be experienced in one’s own Dasein is accessible in that
of a stranger. But is this presupposition actually so baseless?

Indisputably, the  fact that one Dasein  can be represented(2) by  another
belongs to its possibilities of Being in Being-with-one-another in the world.
In  everyday  concern,  constant  and  manifold  use  is  made  of  such
representability. Whenever we go anywhere or have anything to contribute,
we can be represented by someone within the range of that ‘environment’
with which we are most closely concerned. The great multiplicity of ways
of Being-in-the-world  in  which one person  can be represented  by another,
not  only  extends  to  the  more  refined  modes  of  publicly  being  with  one
another, but is likewise germane to those possibilities of concern which are
restricted within definite ranges, and which are cut to the measure of one’s
occupation, one’s social status, or one’s age. But the very meaning of such
representation is such that it is always a representation ‘in’ [“in” und “bei”]
something—that  is  to  say,  in  concerning  oneself  with  something.  But
proximally  and  for  the  most  part  everyday  Dasein  understands  itself  in
terms  of  that  with  which  it  is  customarily  concerned.  ‘One  is’  what  one
does.  In  relation  to  this  sort  of  Being  (the  everyday  manner  in  which  we
join  with  one  another  in  absorption  in  the  ‘world’  of  our  concern)
representability  is  not  only  quite  possible  but  is  even  constitutive  for  our
being with one another. Here one Dasein can and must, within certain 
limits, ‘be’ another Dasein.
 

1. ‘…eine völlige Verkennung...’ The older editions have ‘totale’ rather than ‘völlige’.
2.  ‘Vertretbarkeit’.  The  verb  ‘vertreten’  means  ‘to  represent’  in  the  sense  of  ‘deputizing’  for
someone. It should be noted that the verb ‘vorstellen’ is also sometimes translated as ‘to represent’,
but in the quite different sense of ‘affording a “representation” or “idea” of something’.

H. 240

 

However, this possibility of representing breaks down completely if the
issue  is  one  of  representing  that  possibility-of-Being  which  makes  up
Dasein’s coming to an end, and which, as such, gives to it its wholeness. No
one can take the Other’s dying away from him. Of course someone can ‘go
to his death for another’. But that always means to sacrifice oneself for the
Other ‘in some definite affair’. Such “dying for” can never signify that the
Other has thus had his death taken away in even the slightest degree. Dying
is something that every Dasein itself must take upon itself at the time. By its
very  essence,  death  is  in  every  case  mine,  in  so  far  as  it  ‘is’  at  all.  And
indeed  death  signifies  a  peculiar  possibility-of-Being  in  which  the  very
Being of one’s own Dasein is an issue. In dying, it is shown that mineness
and  existence  are  ontologically  constitutive  for  death.(i)  Dying  is  not  an
event;  it  is  a  phenomenon  to  be  understood  existentially;  and  it  is  to  be
understood in a distinctive sense which must be still more closely delimited.
But  if  ‘ending’,  as  dying,  is  constitutive  for  Dasein’s  totality,  then  the
Being  of  this  wholeness  itself  must  be  conceived  as  an  existential
phenomenon of a Dasein which is in each case one’s own. In ‘ending’, and
in Dasein’s Being-a-whole, for which such ending is constitutive, there is,
by  its  very  essence,  no  representing.  These  are  the  facts  of  the  case
existentially; one fails to recognize this when one interposes the expedient
of making the dying of Others a substitute theme for the analysis of totality.
So once again the attempt to make Dasein’s Being-a-whole accessible in
a  way  that  is  appropriate  to  the  phenomena,  has  broken  down.  But  our
deliberations  have  not  been  negative  in  their  outcome;  they  have  been
oriented by the phenomena, even if only rather roughly. We have indicated
that  death  is  an  existential  phenomenon.  Our  investigation  is  thus  forced
into  a  purely  existential  orientation  to  the  Dasein  which  is  in  every  case
one’s  own.  The  only  remaining  possibility  for  the  analysis  of  death  as
dying, is either to form a purely existential conception of this phenomenon,
or else to forgo any ontological understanding of it.
 

i. Cf. Section 9, H. 41 ff.

H. 241

 

When  we  characterized  the  transition  from  Dasein  to  no-longer-Dasein
as  Being-no-longer-in-the-world,  we  showed  further  that  Dasein’s  going-
out-of-the-world  in  the  sense  of  dying  must  be  distinguished  from  the
going-out-of-the-world of that which merely has life [des Nur-lebenden]. In
our  terminology  the  ending  of  anything  that  is  alive,  is  denoted  as
“perishing” [Verenden]. We can see the difference only if the kind of ending
which Dasein can have is distinguished from the end of a life.(ii) Of course
“dying” may also be taken physiologically and biologically. But the medical
concept of the ‘exitus’ does not coincide with that of “perishing”.

From  the  foregoing  discussion  of  the  ontological  possibility  of  getting
death into our grasp, it becomes clear at the same time that substructures of
entities  with  another  kind  of  Being  (presence-at-hand  or  life)  thrust
themselves  to  the  fore  unnoticed,  and  threaten  to  bring  confusion  to  the
Interpretation  of  this  phenomenon—even  to  the  first  suitable  way  of
presenting it. We can encounter this phenomenon only by seeking, for our
further analysis, an ontologically adequate way of defining the phenomena
which are constitutive for it, such as “end” and “totality”.
 

ii. Cf. Section 10, H. 45 ff.

48. That which is Still Outstanding; the End; Totality

 

the 

Within 

framework  of 

investigation,  our  ontological
this 
characterization of the end and totality can be only provisional. To perform
this task adequately, we must not only set forth the formal structure of end
in  general  and  of  totality  in  general;  we  must  likewise  disentangle  the
structural variations which are possible for them in different realms—that is
to  say,  deformalized  variations  which  have  been  put  into  relationship
respectively  with  definite  kinds  of  entities  as  ‘subject-matter’,  and  which
have had their character Determined in terms of the Being of these entities.
This task, in turn, presupposes that a sufficiently unequivocal and positive
Interpretation  shall  have  been  given  for  the  kinds  of  Being  which  require
that the aggregate of entities be divided into such realms. But if we are to
understand  these  ways  of  Being,  we  need  a  clarified  idea  of  Being  in
general.  The  task  of  carrying  out  in  an  appropriate  way  the  ontological
analysis of end and totality breaks down not only because the theme is so

far-reaching, but because there is a difficulty in principle: to master this task
successfully, we must presuppose that precisely what we are seeking in this
investigation—the  meaning  of  Being  in  general—is  something  which  we
have found already and with which we are quite familiar.

H. 242

 

In the following considerations, the ‘variations’ in which we are chiefly
interested are those of end and totality; these are ways in which Dasein gets
a  definite  character  ontologically,  and  as  such  they  should  lead  to  a
primordial  Interpretation  of  this  entity.  Keeping  constantly  in  view  the
existential  constitution  of  Dasein  already  set  forth,  we  must  try  to  decide
how inappropriate to Dasein ontologically are those conceptions of end and
totality which first thrust themselves to the fore, no matter how categorially
indefinite  they  may  remain.  The  rejection  [Zurückweisung]  of  such
concepts  must  be  developed  into  a  positive  assignment  [Zuweisung]  of
them  to  their  specific  realms.  In  this  way  our  understanding  of  end  and
totality in their variant forms as existentialia will be strengthened, and this
will guarantee the possibility of an ontological Interpretation of death.

But even if the analysis of Dasein’s end and totality takes on so broad an
orientation, this cannot mean that the existential concepts of end and totality
are  to  be  obtained  by  way  of  a  deduction.  On  the  contrary,  the  existential
meaning  of  Dasein’s  coming-to-an-end  must  be  taken  from  Dasein  itself,
and we must show how such ‘ending’ can constitute Being-a-whole for the
entity which exists.

We may formulate in three theses the discussion of death up to this point:
1. there belongs to Dasein, as long as it is, a “not-yet” which it will be—that
which is constantly still outstanding; (2). the coming-to-its-end of what-is-
not-yet-at-an-end (in which what is still outstanding is liquidated as regards
its  Being)  has  the  character  of  no-longer-Dasein;  3.  coming-to-an-end
implies  a  mode  of  Being  in  which  the  particular  Dasein  simply  cannot  be
represented by someone else.

In Dasein there is undeniably a constant ‘lack of totality’ which finds an
end  with  death.  This  “not-yet”  ‘belongs’  to  Dasein  as  long  as  it  is;  this  is
how  things  stand  phenomenally.  Is  this  to  be  Interpreted  as  still
outstanding?(1) With relation to what entities do we talk about that which is
still outstanding? When we use this expression we have in view that which

indeed ‘belongs’ to an entity, but is still missing. Outstanding, as a way of
being  missing,  is  grounded  upon  a  belonging-to.(2)  For  instance,  the
remainder  yet  to  be  received  when  a  debt  is  to  be  balanced  off,  is  still
outstanding.  That  which  is  still  outstanding  is  not  yet  at  one’s  disposal.
When the ‘debt’ gets paid off, that which is still outstanding gets liquidated;
this  signifies  that  the  money  ‘comes  in’,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the
remainder  comes  successively  along.  By  this  procedure  the  “not-yet”  gets
filled  up,  as  it  were,  until  the  sum  that  is  owed  is  “all  together”.(3)
Therefore,  to  be  still  outstanding  means  that  what  belongs  together  is  not
yet  all  together.  Ontologically,  this  implies  the  un-readiness-to-hand  of
those  portions  which  have  yet  to  be  contributed.  These  portions  have  the
same kind of Being as those which are ready-to-hand already; and the latter,
for  their  part,  do  not  have  their  kind  of  Being  modified  by  having  the
remainder  come 
in.  Whatever  “lack-of-togetherness”  remains  [Das
bestehende Unzusammen] gets “paid off’ by a cumulative piecing-together.
Entities  for  which  anything  is  still  outstanding  have  the  kind  of  Being  of
something 
is
characterized  as  a  “sum”,  and  so  is  that  lack-of-togetherness  which  is
founded upon it.
 

ready-to-hand.  The 

[Das  Zusammen] 

togetherness 

1.  ‘Aber  darf  der  phänomenale  Tatbestand,  dass  zum  Dasein,  solange  es  ist,  dieses  Noch-nicht
“gehört”,  als  Ausstand  interpretiert  werden?’  The  contrast  between  ‘Tatbestand’  and  ‘Ausstand’  is
perhaps intentional.

2. ‘Ausstehen ala Fehlen gründet in einer Zugehörigkeit.’
3.  ‘Tilgung  der  “Schuld”  als  Behebung  des  Ausstandes  bedeutet  das  “Eingehen”,  das  ist
Nacheinanderankommen  des  Restes,  wodurch  das  Noch-nicht  gleichsam  aufgefüllt  wird,  bis  die
geschuldete Summe “beisammen” ist.’ On ‘Schuld’ see note 1, H. 280.

H. 243

 

But  this  lack-of-togetherness  which  belongs  to  such  a  mode  of
togetherness—this  being-missing  as  still-outstanding—cannot  by  any
means  define  ontologically  that  “not-yet”  which  belongs  to  Dasein  as  its
possible death. Dasein does not have at all the kind of Being of something
ready-to-hand-within-the-world.  The  togetherness  of  an  entity  of  the  kind
which  Dasein  is  ‘in  running  its  course’  until  that  ‘course’  has  been
completed, is not constituted by a ‘continuing’ piecing-on of entities which,
somehow and somewhere, are ready-to-hand already in their own right.(1)
 

1. Throughout this sentence Heidegger uses words derived from the verb ‘laufen’, ‘to run’. Thus,
‘in running its course’ represents ‘in seinem Verlauf’, ‘ “its course” has been completed’ represents
‘es “seinem Lauf” vollendet hat’; ‘continuing’ represents ‘fortlaufende’.

That  Dasein should be together  only  when  its “not-yet”  has been filled
up is so far from the case that it is precisely then that Dasein is no longer.
Any Dasein always exists in just such a manner that its “not-yet” belongs to
it. But are there not entities which are as they are and to which a “not-yet”
can belong, but which do not necessarily have Dasein’s kind of Being?

For instance, we  can say, “The last  quarter is  still  outstanding until  the
moon  gets  full”.  The  “not-yet”  diminishes  as  the  concealing  shadow
disappears. But here the moon is always present-at-hand as a whole already.
Leaving aside the fact that we can never get the moon wholly in our grasp
even  when  it  is  full,  this  “not-yet”  does  not  in  any  way  signify  a  not-yet-
Being-together of the parts which belongs to the moon, but pertains only to
the way we get it in our grasp perceptually. The “not-yet” which belongs to
Dasein,  however,  is  not  just  something  which  is  provisionally  and
occasionally  inaccessible  to  one’s  own  experience  or  even  to  that  of  a
stranger;  it  ‘is’  not  yet  ‘actual’  at  all.  Our  problem  does  not  pertain  to
getting into our grasp the “not-yet’ which is of the character of Dasein; it
pertains to the possible Being or not-Being of this “not-yet”. Dasein must,
as itself, become—that is to say, be—what it is not yet. Thus if we are to be
able, by comparison, to  define that Being  of  the  “not-yet”  which  is  of  the
character of Dasein, we must take into consideration entities to whose kind
of Being becoming belongs.

H. 244

 

When,  for  instance,  a  fruit  is  unripe,  it  “goes  towards”  its  ripeness.  In
this  process  of  ripening,  that  which  the  fruit  is  not  yet,  is  by  no  means
pieced  on  as  something  not  yet  present-at-hand.  The  fruit  brings  itself  to
ripeness,  and  such  a  bringing  of  itself  is  a  characteristic  of  its  Being  as  a
fruit. Nothing imaginable which one might contribute to it, would eliminate
the unripeness of the fruit, if this entity did not come to ripeness of its own
accord. When we speak of the “not-yet” of the unripeness, we do not have
in view something else which stands outside [aussenstehendes], and which
—with  utter  indifference  to  the  fruit—might  be  present-at-hand  in  it  and
with it. What we have in view is the fruit itself in its specific kind of Being.

The  sum  which  is  not  yet  complete  is,  as  something  ready-to-  hand,  ‘a
matter  of  indifference’  as  regards  the  remainder  which  is  lacking  and  un-
ready-to-hand,  though,  taken  strictly,  it  can  neither  be  indifferent  to  that
remainder  nor  not  be  indifferent  to  it.(1)  The  ripening  fruit,  however,  not
only is not indifferent to its unripeness as something other than itself, but it
is  that  unripeness  as  it  ripens.  The  “not-yet”  has  already  been  included  in
the  very  Being  of  the  fruit,  not  as  some  random  characteristic,  but  as
something constitutive. Correspondingly, as long as any Dasein is, it too is
already its “not-yet”.(iii)

That  which  makes  up  the  ‘lack  of  totality’  in  Dasein,  the  constant
“ahead-of-itself”,  is  neither  something  still  outstanding  in  a  summative
togetherness,  nor  something  which  has  not  yet  become  accessible.  It  is  a
“not-yet”  which  any  Dasein,  as  the  entity  which  it  is,  has  to  be.
Nevertheless,  the  comparison  with  the  unripeness  of  the  fruit  shows
essential differences, although there is a certain agreement. If we take note
of  these  differences,  we  shall  recognize  how  indefinite  our  talk  about  the
end and ending has hitherto been.

Ripening is the specific Being of the fruit. It is also a kind of Being of
the  “not-yet”  (of  unripeness);  and,  as  such  a  kind  of  Being,  it  is  formally
analogous  to  Dasein,  in  that  the  latter,  like  the  former,  is  in  every  case
already its “not-yet” in a sense still to be defined. But even then, this does
not  signify  that  ripeness  as  an  ‘end’  and  death  as  an  ‘end’  coincide  with
regard to their ontological structure as ends. With ripeness, the fruit fulfils
itself.(2) But is the death at which Dasein arrives, a fulfilment in this sense?
With its death, Dasein has indeed ‘fulfilled its course’. But in doing so, has
it  necessarily  exhausted  its  specific  possibilities?  Rather,  are  not  these
precisely  what  gets  taken  away  from  Dasein?  Even  ‘unfulfilled’  Dasein
ends.  On  the  other  hand,  so  little  is  it  the  case  that  Dasein  comes  to  its
ripeness  only  with  death,  that  Dasein  may  well  have  passed  its  ripeness
before the end.(3) For the most part, Dasein ends in unfulfilment, or else by
having disintegrated and been used up.
 

iii. The distinction between a whole and a sum, ὅλον and πᾶν, totum and compositum, has  been
familiar since the time of Plato and Aristotle. But admittedly no one as yet knows anything about the
systematics  of  the  categorial  variations  which  this  division  already  embraces,  nor  have  these  been
conceptualized.  As  an  approach  to  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  structures  in  question,  cf.  Edmund
Husserl,  Logische  Untersuchungen,  vol.  II,  Untersuchung  III:  ‘Zur  Lehre  von  den  Ganzen  und
Teilen’.
 

1.  ‘Die  noch  nicht  volle  Summe  ist  als  Zuhandenes  gegen  den  fehlenden  unzuhandenen  Rest

“gleichgültig”. Streng genommen kann sie weder ungleichgültig, noch gleichgültig dagegen sein.’

2.  ‘Mit  der  Reife  vollendet  sich  die  Frucht.’  Notice  that  the  verb  ‘vollenden’,  which  we  here
translate as ‘fulfil’, involves the verb ‘enden’ (‘to end’). While ‘vollenden’ may mean ‘to bring fully
to an end’ or ‘to terminate’, it may also mean ‘to complete’ or ‘to perfect’.

3.  While  we  have  translated  ‘Reife’  by  its  cognate  ‘ripeness’,  this  word  applies  generally  to

almost any kind of maturity, even that of Dasein—not merely the maturity of fruits and vegetables.

Ending  does  not  necessarily  mean  fulfilling  oneself.  It  thus  becomes
more  urgent  to  ask  in  what  sense,  if  any,  death  must  be  conceived  as  the
ending of Dasein.

H. 245

 

In the first instance, “ending” signifies “stopping”, and it signifies this in
senses  which  are  ontologically  different.  The  rain  stops.  It  is  no  longer
present-at-hand.  The  road  stops.  Such  an  ending  does  not  make  the  road
disappear,  but  such  a  stopping  is  determinative  for  the  road  as  this  one,
which  is  present-at-hand.  Hence  ending,  as  stopping,  can  signify  either
“passing  over  into  non-presence-at-hand”  or  else  “Being-present-at-hand
only when the end comes”. The latter kind of ending, in turn, may either be
determinative for something which is present-at-hand in an unfinished way,
as a road breaks off when one finds it under construction; or it may rather
constitute  the  ‘finishedness”  of  something  present-at-hand,  as  the  painting
is finished with the last stroke of the brush.

But ending as “getting finished” does not include fulfilling. On the other
hand,  whatever  has  got  to  be  fulfilled  must  indeed  reach  the  finishedness
that is possible for it. Fulfilling is a mode of ‘finishedness’, and is founded
upon  it.  Finishedness  is  itself  possible  only  as  a  determinate  form  of
something present-at-hand or ready-to-hand.

Even  ending  in  the  sense  of  “disappearing”  can  still  have  its
modifications according to the kind of Being which an entity may have. The
rain is at an end—that is to say it has disappeared. The bread is at an end—
that is to say, it has been used up and is no longer available as something
ready-to-hand.

By none of these modes of ending can death be suitably characterized as
the “end” of Dasein. If dying, as Being-at-an-end, were understood in the
sense  of  an  ending  of  the  kind  we  have  discussed,  then  Dasein  would
thereby be treated as something present-at-hand or ready-to-hand. In death,

Dasein  has  not  been  fulfilled  nor  has  it  simply  disappeared;  it  has  not
become  finished  nor  is  it  wholly  at  one’s  disposal  as  something  ready-to-
hand.

On  the  contrary,  just  as  Dasein  is already  its  “not-yet”,  and  is  its  “not-
yet” constantly as long as it is, it is already its end too. The “ending” which
we have in view when we speak of death, does not signify Dasein’s Being-
at-an-end [Zu-Ende-sein], but a Being-towards-the-end [Sein zum Ende] of
this entity. Death is a way to be, which Dasein takes over as soon as it is.
“As soon as man comes to life, he is at once old enough to die.’(iv)

Ending,  as  Being-towards-the-end,  must  be  clarified  ontologically  in
terms  of  Dasein’s  kind  of  Being.  And  presumably  the  possibility  of  an
existent  Being  of  that  “not-yet”  which  lies  ‘before’  the  ‘end’,(1)  will
become  intelligible  only  if  the  character  of  ending  has  been  determined
existentially.  The  existential  clarification  of  Being-towards-the-end  will
also  give  us  for  the  first  time  an  adequate  basis  for  defining  what  can
possibly be the meaning of our talk about a totality of Dasein, if indeed this
totality is to be constituted by death as the ‘end’.
 

iv.  Der  Ackermann  aus  Böhmen,  edited  by  A.  Bernt  and  K.  Burdach.  (Vom  Mittelalter  zur
Reformation. Forschungen zur Geschichte der deutschen Bildung, edited by K. Burdach, vol. III, 2.
Teil) 1917, chapter 20, p. 46.
 

1.  ‘...die  Möglichkeit  eines  existierenden  Seins  des  Noch-nicht,  das  “vor”  dem  “Ende”  liegt...’

The earlier editions have ‘...das ja “vor” dem “Ende”…’

H. 246

 

Our  attempt  to  understand  Dasein’s  totality  by  taking  as  our  point  of
departure a clarification of the “not-yet” and going on to a characterization
of “ending”, has not led us to our goal. It has shown only in a negative way
that  the  “not-yet”  which  Dasein  in  every  case  is,  resists  Interpretation  as
something  still  outstanding.  The  end  towards  which Dasein is  as  existing,
remains  inappropriately  defined  by  the  notion  of  a  “Being-at-an-end”.
These considerations, however, should at the same time make it plain that
they must be turned back in their course. A positive characterization of the
phenomena  in  question  (Being-not-yet,  ending,  totality)  succeeds  only
when it is unequivocally oriented to Dasein’s state of Being. But if we have
any  insight  into  the  realms  where  those  end-structures  and  totality-

structures which are to be construed ontologically with Dasein belong, this
will,  in  a  negative  way,  make  this  unequivocal  character  secure  against
wrong turnings.

If we are to carry out a positive Interpretation of death and its character
as an end, by way of existential analysis, we must take as our clue the basic
state of Dasein at which we have already arrived—the phenomenon of care.

49. How the Existential Analysis of Death is Distinguished from Other

Possible Interpretations of this Phenomenon
 

The  unequivocal  character  of  our  ontological  Interpretation  of  death
must first be strengthened by our bringing explicitly to mind what such an
Interpretation can not inquire about, and what it would be vain to expect it
to give us any information or instructions about.(1)
 

1. ‘…wonach diese nicht fragen, und worüber eine Auskunft und Anweisung von ihr vergeblich
erwartet werden kann.’ The older editions have ‘k a n n’ after ‘fragen’, and ‘muss’ where the newer
editions have ‘kann’.

Death,  in  the  widest  sense,  is  a  phenomenon  of  life.  Life  must  be
understood as a kind of Being to which there belongs a Being-in-the-world.
Only if this kind of Being is oriented in a privative way to Dasein, can we
fix  its  character  ontologically.  Even  Dasein  may  be  considered  purely  as
life.  When  the  question  is  formulated  from  the  viewpoint  of  biology  and
physiology, Dasein moves into that domain of Being which we know as the
world of animals and plants. In this field, we can obtain data and statistics
about  the  longevity  of  plants,  animals  and  men,  and  we  do  this  by
ascertaining  them  ontically.  Connections  between  longevity,  propagation,
and  growth  may  be  recognized.  The  ‘kinds’  of  death,  the  causes,
‘contrivances’ and ways in which it makes its entry, can be explored.(v)
 

v.  On  this  topic,  cf.  the  comprehensive  presentation  in  E.  Korschelt’s  Lebensdauer,  Altern  und

Tod, 3rd Edition, 1924. Note especially the full bibliography, pp. 414 ff.

H. 247

 

Underlying this biological-ontical exploration of death is  a problematic
that is ontological. We still have to ask how the ontological essence of death
is  defined  in  terms  of  that  of  life.  In  a  certain  way,  this  has  always  been
decided  already  in  the  ontical  investigation  of  death.  Such  investigations
operate  with  preliminary  conceptions  of  life  and  death,  which  have  been
more  or  less  clarified.  These  preliminary  conceptions  need  to  be  sketched
out  by  the  ontology  of  Dasein.  Within  the  ontology  of  Dasein,  which  is
superordinate to an ontology of life, the existential analysis of death is, in
turn, subordinate to a characterization of Dasein’s basic state. The ending of
that  which  lives  we  have  called  ‘perishing’.  Dasein  too  ‘has’  its  death,  of
the  kind  appropriate  to  anything  that  lives;  and  it  has  it,  not  in  ontical
isolation, but as codetermined by its primordial kind of Being. In so far as
this is the case, Dasein too can end without authentically dying, though on
the  other  hand,  qua  Dasein,  it  does  not  simply  perish.  We  designate  this
intermediate phenomenon as its “demise”.(1) Let the term “dying” stand for
that way of Being in which Dasein is towards its death.(2) Accordingly we
must say that Dasein never perishes. Dasein, however, can demise only as
long as it is dying. Medical and biological investigation into “demising” can
obtain results which may even become significant ontologically if the basic
orientation for an existential Interpretation of death has been made secure.
Or must sickness and death in general—even from a medical point of view
—be primarily conceived as existential phenomena?
 

1. ‘Ableben’. This  term,  which  literally  means  something  like  ‘living  out’  one’s  life,  is  used  in
ordinary  German  as  a  rather  legalistic  term  for  a  person’s  death.  We  shall  translate  it  as  ‘demise’
(both  as  a  noun  and  as  a  verb),  which  also  has  legalistic  connotations.  But  this  translation  is  an
arbitrary one, and does not adequately express the meaning which Heidegger is explaining.

2. ‘…Seinsweise, in der das Dasein zu seinem Tode ist.’

The existential Interpretation of death takes precedence over any biology
and  ontology  of  life.  But  it  is  also  the  foundation  for  any  investigation  of
death  which 
is  biographical  or  historiological,  ethnological  or
psychological.  In  any  ‘typology’  of  ‘dying’,  as  a  characterization  of  the
conditions under which a demise is ‘Experienced’ and of the ways in which
it is ‘Experienced’, the concept of death is already presupposed. Moreover,
a psychology of ‘dying’ gives information about the ‘living’ of the person
who is ‘dying’, rather than about dying itself. This simply reflects the fact
that  when  Dasein  dies—and  even  when  it  dies  authentically—it  does  not

have to do so with an Experience of its factical demising, or  i n   such an
Experience.  Likewise  the  ways  in  which  death  is  taken  among  primitive
peoples, and their ways of comporting themselves towards it in magic and
the
cult, 
Interpretation of this understanding already requires an existential analytic
and a corresponding conception of death.

the  understanding  of  Dasein;  but 

illuminate  primarily 

H. 248

 

On the other hand, in the ontological analysis of Being-towards-the-end
there is no anticipation of our taking any existentiell stand toward death. If
“death”  is  defined  as  the  ‘end’  of  Dasein—that  is  to  say,  of  Being-in-the-
world—this does not imply any ontical decision whether ‘after death’ still
another Being is possible, either higher or lower, or whether Dasein ‘lives
on’  or  even  ‘outlasts’  itself  and  is  ‘immortal’.  Nor  is  anything  decided
ontically about the ‘other-worldly’ and its possibility, any more than about
the ‘this-worldly’;(1) it is not as if norms and rules for comporting oneself
towards  death  were  to  be  proposed  for  ‘edification’.  But  our  analysis  of
death  remains  purely  ‘this-worldly’  in  so  far  as  it  Interprets  that
phenomenon merely in the way in which it enters into any particular Dasein
as  a  possibility  of  its  Being.  Only  when  death  is  conceived  in  its  full
ontological  essence  can  we  have  any  methodological  assurance  in  even
asking what may be after death; only then can we do so with meaning and
justification.  Whether  such  a  question  is  a  possible  theoretical question  at
all will not be decided here. The this-worldly ontological Interpretation of
death takes precedence over any ontical other-worldly speculation.
 

1.  ‘Über  das  “Jenseits”  und  seine  Möglichkeit  wird  ebensowenig  ontisch  entschieden  wie  über

das “Diesseits”...’ The quotation marks around “Diesseits” appear only in the later editions.

Finally,  what  might  be  discussed  under  the  topic  of  a  ‘metaphysic  of
death’ lies outside the domain of an existential analysis of death. Questions
of how and when death ‘came into the world’, what ‘meaning’ it can have
and is to have as an evil and affliction in the aggregate of entities—these are
questions  which  necessarily  presuppose  an  understanding  not  only  of  the
character  of  Being  which  belongs  to  death,  but  of  the  ontology  of  the

aggregate  of  entities  as  a  whole,  and  especially  of  the  ontological
clarification of evil and negativity in general.

Methodologically,  the  existential  analysis  is  superordinate  to  the
questions  of  a  biology,  psychology,  theodicy,  or  theology  of  death.  Taken
ontically,  the  results  of  the  analysis  show  the  peculiar  formality  and
emptiness of any ontological characterization. However, that must not blind
us  to  the  rich  and  complicated  structure  of  the  phenomenon.  If  Dasein  in
general  never  becomes  accessible  as  something  present-at-hand,  because
Being-possible belongs in its own way to Dasein’s kind of Being, even less
may  we  expect  that  we  can  simply  read  off  the  ontological  structure  of
death, if death is indeed a distinctive possibility of Dasein.

H. 249

 

On the other hand, the analysis cannot keep clinging to an idea of death
which  has  been  devised  accidentally  and  at  random.  We  can  restrain  this
arbitrariness  only  by  giving  beforehand  an  ontological  characterization  of
the  kind  of  Being  in  which  the  ‘end’  enters  into  Dasein’s  average
everydayness.  To  do  so,  we  must  fully  envisage  those  structures  of
everydayness which we have earlier set forth. The fact that in an existential
analysis  of  death,  existentiell  possibilities  of  Being-towards-death  are
consonant with it, is implied by the essence of all ontological investigation.
All  the  more  explicitly  must  the  existential  definition  of  concepts  be
unaccompanied  by  any  existentiell  commitments,(1)  especially  with
relation  to  death,  in  which  Dasein’s  character  as  possibility  lets  itself  be
revealed  most  precisely.  The  existential  problematic  aims  only  at  setting
forth the ontological structure of Dasein’s Being-towards-the-end.(vi)
 

vi. In its Interpretation of ‘life’, the anthropology worked out in Christian theology—from Paul
right up to Calvin’s meditatio futurae vitae—has always kept death in view. Wilhelm Dilthey, whose
real philosophical tendencies were aimed at an ontology of ‘life’, could not fail to recognize how life
is  connected  with  death:  ‘...and  finally,  that  relationship  which  most  deeply  and  universally
determines  the  feeling  of  our  Dasein—the  relationship  of  life  to  death;  for  the  bounding  of  our
existence by death is always decisive for our understanding and assessment of life.’ (Das Erlebnsis
und  die  Dichtung,  5th  Edition,  p.  230.)  Recently,  G.  Simmel  has  also  explicitly  included  the
phenomenon of death in his characterization of ‘life’, though admittedly without clearly separating
the biological-ontical and the ontological-existential problematics. (Cf. his Lebensanschauung: Vier
Metaphysische  Kapitel,  1918,  pp.  99-153.)  For  the  investigation  which  lies  before  us,  compare
especially Karl Jaspers’ Psychologie der Weltanschauungen, 3rd Edition, 1925, pp. 229 ff., especially
pp. 259-270. Jaspers takes as his clue to death the phenomenon of the ‘limit-situation’ as he has set it

forth—a phenomenon whose fundamental significance goes beyond any typology of ‘attitudes’ and
‘world-pictures’.

lecture 

In  his 

Dilthey’s  challenges  have  been  taken  up  by  Rudolf  Unger  in  his  Herder,  Novalis  und  Kleist.
Studien über die Entwicklung des Todesproblems im Denken und Dichten von Sturm und Drang zur
‘Literaturgeschichte  als  Problemgeschichte.  Zur  Frage
Romantik,  1922. 
geisteshistorischer  Synthese,  mit  besonderer  Beziehung  auf  Wilhelm  Dilthey’  (Schriften  der
Königsberger Gelehrten Gesellschaft, Geisteswissenschaftliche Klasse, 1. Jahr, Heft 1, 1924), Unger
considers the principles of Dilthey’s way of formulating the question. He sees clearly the significance
of phenomenological research for laying the foundations of the ‘problems of life’ in a more radical
manner. (Op. cit., pp. 17 ff.)
 

1.  ‘Um  so  ausdrücklicher  muss  mit  der  existenzialen  Begriffsbestimmung  die  existenzielle

Unverbindlichkeit zusammengehen…’

50.  Preliminary  Sketch  of  the  Existential-ontological  Structure  of

Death
 

 

H. 250

there  has  emerged 

the  necessity  of  Interpreting 

From  our  considerations  of  totality,  end,  and  that  which  is  still
outstanding, 
the
phenomenon of death as Being-towards-the-end, and of doing so in terms of
Dasein’s basic state. Only so can it be made plain to what extent Being-a-
whole, as constituted by Being towards-the-end, is possible in Dasein itself
in conformity with the structure of its Being. We have seen that care is the
basic state of Dasein. The ontological signification of the expression “care”
has  been  expressed  in  the  ‘definition’:  “ahead-of-itself-Being-already-in
(the  world)  as  Being-alongside  entities  which  we  encounter  (within-the-
world)”.(vii)  In  this  are  expressed  the  fundamental  characteristics  of
Dasein’s Being: existence, in the “ahead-of-itself”; facticity, in the “Being-
already-in”; falling, in the “Being-alongside”. If indeed death belongs in a
distinctive sense to the Being of Dasein, then death (or Being-towards-the-
end) must be defined in terms of these characteristics.

We  must,  in  the  first  instance,  make  plain  in  a  preliminary  sketch  how
the

Dasein’s  existence,  facticity,  and  falling  reveal 
phenomenon of death.

themselves 

in 

The Interpretation in which the “not-yet—and with it even the uttermost
“not-yet”,  the  end  of  Dasein—was  taken  in  the  sense  of  something  still
outstanding,  has  been  rejected  as  inappropriate  in  that  it  included  the

ontological perversion of making Dasein something present-at-hand. Being-
at-an-end implies existentially Being-towards-the-end. The uttermost “not-
yet” has the character of something towards which  Dasein comports itself.
The end is impending [steht... bevor] for Dasein. Death is not something not
yet  present-at-hand,  nor  is  it  that  which  is  ultimately  still  outstanding  but
which  has  been  reduced  to  a  minimum.  Death  is  something  that  stands
before us—something impending.(1)

However,  there  is  much  that  can  impend  for  Dasein  as  Being-in-the-
world.  The  character  of  impendence  is  not  distinctive  of  death.  On  the
contrary,  this Interpretation  could  even lead  us to  suppose that death must
be  understood  in  the  sense  of  some  impending  event  encountered
environmentally. For instance, a storm, the remodelling of the house, or the
arrival  of  a  friend,  may  be  impending;  and  these  are  entities  which  are
respectively  present-at-hand,  ready-to-hand,  and  there-with-us.  The  death
which impends does not have this kind of Being.

But there may also be impending for Dasein a journey, for instance, or a
disputation  with  Others,  or  the  forgoing  of  something  of  a  kind  which
Dasein itself can be—its own possibilities of Being, which are based on its
Being with Others.

Death  is  a  possibility-of-Being  which  Dasein  itself  has  to  take  over  in
every  case.  With  death,  Dasein  stands  before  itself  in  its  ownmost
potentiality-for-Being. This is a possibility in which the issue is nothing less
than  Dasein’s  Being-in-the-world.  Its  death  is  the  possibility  of  no-longer
being-able-to-be-there.(2) If Dasein stands before itself as this possibility, it
has  been  fully  assigned  to  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.  When  it
stands  before  itself  in  this  way,  all  its  relations  to  any  other  Dasein  have
been  undone.(3)  This  ownmost  non-relational(4)  possibility  is  at  the  same
time the uttermost one.
 

vii. Cf. Section 41, H. 192.

 

1. ‘…sondern eher ein Bevorstand.’ While we shall ordinarily use various forms of ‘impend’ to
translate  ‘Bevorstand’,  ‘bevorstehen’,  etc.,  one  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  literal  meaning  of  these
expressions  is  one  of  ‘standing  before’,  so  that  they  may  be  quite  plausibly  contrasted  with
‘Ausstehen’, etc. (‘standing out’). Thus we shall occasionally use forms of ‘stand before’ when this
connotation seems to be dominant.

2. ‘Nicht-mehr-dasein-könnens.’ Notice that the expressions ‘Seinkönnen’ (our ‘potentiality-for-

Being’) and ‘Nichtmehrdasein’ (our ‘no-longer-Dasein’) are here fused. Cf. H. 237-242.

3. ‘So sich bevorstehend sind in ihm alle Bezüge zu anderem Dasein gelöst.’

4.  ‘unbezügliche’.  This  term  appears  frequently  throughout  the  chapter,  and,  as  the  present
passage makes clear, indicates that in death Dasein is cut off from relations with others. The term has
accordingly been translated as ‘non-relational’, in the sense of ‘devoid of relationships’.

H. 251

 

As potentiality-for-Being, Dasein cannot outstrip the possibility of death.
Death is the possibility of the absolute impossibility of Dasein. Thus death
reveals  itself  as  that  possibility  which  is  one’s  ownmost,  which  is  non-
relational,  and  which  is  not  to  be  outstripped  [unüberholbare].  As  such,
death  is  something  distinctively  impending.  Its  existential  possibility  is
based on the fact that Dasein is essentially disclosed to itself, and disclosed,
indeed,  as  ahead-of-itself.  This  item  in  the  structure  of  care  has  its  most
primordial  concretion  in  Being-towards-death.  As  a  phenomenon,  Being-
towards-the-end  becomes  plainer  as  Being 
that  distinctive
possibility of Dasein which we have characterized.

towards 

This  ownmost  possibility,  however,  non-relational  and  not  to  be
outstripped,  is  not  one  which  Dasein  procures  for  itself  subsequently  and
occasionally in the course of its Being. On the contrary, if Dasein exists, it
has  already  been  thrown into  this  possibility.  Dasein  does  not,  proximally
and for the most part, have any explicit or even any theoretical knowledge
of the  fact that it has been delivered  over to  its death, and that death  thus
belongs  to  Being-in-the-world.  Thrownness  into  death  reveals  itself  to
Dasein  in  a  more  primordial  and  impressive  manner  in  that  state-of-mind
which we have called “anxiety”.(viii) Anxiety in the face of death is anxiety
‘in  the  face  of’  that  potentiality-for-Being  which  is  one’s  ownmost,  non-
relational,  and  not  to  be  outstripped.  That  in  the  face  of  which  one  has
anxiety is Being-in-the-world itself. That about which one has this anxiety
is simply Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being. Anxiety in the face of death must
not be confused with fear in the face of one’s demise. This anxiety is not an
accidental  or  random  mood  of  ‘weakness’  in  some  individual;  but,  as  a
basic  state-of-mind  of  Dasein,  it  amounts  to  the  disclosedness  of  the  fact
that  Dasein  exists  as  thrown  Being  towards  its  end.  Thus  the  existential
conception of “dying” is made clear as thrown Being towards its ownmost
potentiality-for-Being,  which  is  non-relational  and  not  to  be  outstripped.
Precision is gained by distinguishing this from pure disappearance, and also
from merely perishing, and finally from the ‘Experiencing’ of a demise.(1)
 

viii. Cf. Section 40, H. 184 ff.

1. ‘…gegen ein “Erleben” des Ablebens.’ (Cf. Section 49 above.)

 

 

H. 252

Being-towards-the-end  does not  first  arise through  some  attitude  which
occasionally  emerges,  nor  does  it  arise  as  such  an  attitude;  it  belongs
essentially  to  Dasein’s  thrownness,  which  reveals  itself  in  a  state-of-mind
(mood)  in  one  way  or  another.  The  factical  ‘knowledge’  or  ‘ignorance’
which  prevails  in  any  Dasein  as  to  its  ownmost  Being-towards-the-end,  is
only  the  expression  of  the  existentiell  possibility  that  there  are  different
ways of maintaining oneself in this Being. Factically, there are many who,
proximally  and  for  the  most  part,  do  not  know  about  death;  but  this  must
not be passed off as a ground for proving that Being-towards-death does not
belong  to  Dasein  ‘universally’.  It  only  proves  that  proximally  and  for  the
most part Dasein covers up its ownmost Being-towards-death, fleeing in the
face of it. Factically, Dasein is dying as long as it exists, but proximally and
for  the  most part,  it does so by way  of falling.  For  factical  existing  is  not
only generally and without further differentiation a thrown potentiality-for-
Being-in-the-world, but it has always likewise been absorbed in the ‘world’
of  its  concern.  In  this  falling  Being-alongside,  fleeing  from  uncanniness
announces  itself;  and  this  means  now,  a  fleeing  in  the  face  of  one’s
ownmost Being-towards-death. Existence, facticity, and falling characterize
Being-towards-the-end,  and  are  therefore  constitutive  for  the  existential
conception  of  death.  As  regards  its  ontological  possibility,  dying  is
grounded in care.

But  if  Being-towards-death  belongs  primordially  and  essentially  to
Dasein’s  Being,  then  it  must  also  be  exhibitable  in  everydayness,  even  if
proximally in a way which is inauthentic.(1) And if Being-towards-the-end
should afford the existential possibility of an existentiell Being-a-whole for
Dasein,  then  this  would  give  phenomenal  confirmation  for  the  thesis  that
“care” is the ontological term for the totality of Dasein’s structural whole.
If,  however,  we  are  to  provide  a  full  phenomenal  justification  for  this
principle,  a  preliminary  sketch  of  the  connection  between  Being-towards-
death  and  care  is  not  sufficient.  We  must  be  able  to  see  this  connection
above all in that concretion which lies closest to Dasein—its everydayness.

51. Being-towards-death and the Everydayness of Dasein

In setting forth average everyday Being-towards-death, we must take our
orientation from those structures of everydayness at which we have earlier
arrived. In Being-towards-death, Dasein comports itself towards itself  as a
distinctive  potentiality-for-Being.  But  the  Self  of  everydayness  is  the
“they”.(ix) The “they” is constituted by the way things have been publicly
interpreted, which expresses itself in idle talk.(2) Idle talk must accordingly
make  manifest  the  way  in  which  everyday  Dasein  interprets  for  itself  its
Being-towards-death.  The  foundation  of  any  interpretation  is  an  act  of
understanding, which is always accompanied by a state-of-mind, or, in other
words,  which  has  a  mood.  So  we  must  ask  how  Being-towards-death  is
disclosed by the kind of understanding which, with its state-of-mind, lurks
in  the  idle  talk  of  the  “they”.  How  does  the  “they”  comport  itself
understandingly towards that ownmost possibility of Dasein, which is non-
relational and is not to be outstripped? What state-of-mind discloses to the
“they” that it has been delivered over to death, and in what way?
 

ix. Cf. Section 27, H. 126 ff.

H. 253

 

 

In  the  publicness  with  which  we  are  with  one  another  in  our  everyday
manner, death is ‘known’ as a mishap which is constantly occurring—as a
‘case  of  death’.(3)  Someone  or  other  ‘dies’,  be  he  neighbour  or  stranger
[Nächste oder Fernerstehende].
 

1.  ‘…dann  muss  es  auch—wenngleich  zunächst  uneigentlich—in  der  Alltäglichkeit  aufweisbar

sein.’ The earlier editions have another ‘auch’ just before ‘in der Alltäglichkeit’.

2. ‘...das sich in der öffentlichen Ausgelegtheit konstituiert, die sich im Gerede ausspricht.’ The

earlier editions have ‘...konstituiert. Sie spricht sich aus im Gerede.’

3. ‘Die Öffentlichkeit des alltäglichen Miteinander “kennt” den Tod als standig vorkommendes

Begegnis, als “Todesfall”.’

People who are no acquaintances of ours are ‘dying’ daily and hourly.
‘Death’  is  encountered  as  a  well-known  event  occurring  within-the-world.
As  such  it  remains  in  the  inconspicuousness(x)  characteristic  of  what  is
encountered  in  an  everyday  fashion.  The  “they”  has  already  stowed  away
[gesichert]  an  interpretation  for  this  event.  It  talks  of  it  in  a  ‘fugitive’

manner, either expressly or else in a way which is mostly inhibited, as if to
say,  “One  of  these  days  one  will  die  too,  in  the  end;  but  right  now  it  has
nothing to do with us.”(1)

The analysis of the phrase ‘one dies’ reveals unambiguously the kind of
Being  which  belongs  to  everyday  Being-towards-death.  In  such  a  way  of
talking,  death  is  understood  as  an  indefinite  something  which,  above  all,
must duly arrive from somewhere or other, but which is proximally not yet
present-at-hand for oneself and is therefore no threat. The expression ‘one
dies’  spreads  abroad  the  opinion  that  what  gets  reached,  as  it  were,  by
death,  is  the  “they”.  In  Dasein’s  public  way  of  interpreting,  it  is  said  that
‘one dies’, because everyone else and oneself can talk himself into saying
that “in no case is it I myself”, for this “one” is the “nobody”.(2) ‘Dying’ is
levelled off to an occurrence which reaches Dasein, to be sure, but belongs
to nobody in particular. If idle talk is always ambiguous, so is this manner
of talking about death. Dying, which is essentially mine in such a way that
no  one  can  be  my  representative,  is  perverted  into  an  event  of  public
occurrence  which  the  “they”  encounters.  In  the  way  of  talking  which  we
have  characterized,  death  is  spoken  of  as  a  ‘case’  which  is  constantly
occurring. Death gets passed off as always something ‘actual’; its character
as a possibility gets concealed, and so are the other two items that belong to
it—the fact that it is non-relational and that it is not to be outstripped. By
such  ambiguity,  Dasein  puts  itself  in  the  position  of  losing  itself  in  the
“they”  as  regards  a  distinctive  potentiality-for-Being  which  belongs  to
Dasein’s  ownmost  Self.  The  “they”  gives  its  approval,  and  aggravates  the
temptation  to  cover  up  from  oneself  one’s  ownmost  Being-towards-death.
(xi) This evasive concealment in the face of death dominates everydayness
so  stubbornly  that,  in  Being  with  one  another,  the  ‘neighbours’  often  still
keep talking the ‘dying person’ into the belief that he will escape death and
soon  return  to  the  tranquillized  everydayness  of  the  world  of  his  concern.
Such ‘solicitude’ is meant to ‘console’ him.
 

x. Cf. Section 16, H. 72 ff.
xi. Cf. Section 38, H. 177 ff.

 

1. ‘…man stirbt am Ende auch einmal, aber zunächst bleibt man selbst unbetroffen.’
2. ‘Die öffentliche Daseinsauslegung sagt: “man stirbt”, weil damit jeder andere und man selbst
sich einreden kann: je nicht gerade ich; denn dieses Man ist das Niemand.’ While  we  have  usually
followed the convention of translating the indefinite pronoun ‘man’ as ‘one’ and the expression ‘das
Man’ as ‘the “they” ’,to do so here would obscure the point.

H. 254

 

It insists upon bringing him back into Dasein, while in addition it helps
him  to  keep  his  ownmost  non-relational  possibility-of-Being  completely
concealed.  In  this  manner  the  “they”  provides  [besorgt]  a  constant
tranquillization  about  death.  At bottom,  however,  this is  a tranquillization
not  only  for  him who is  ‘dying’ but  just as much  for  those  who ‘console’
him. And even in the case of a demise, the public is still not to have its own
tranquillity upset by such an event, or be disturbed in the carefreeness with
which it concerns itself.(1) Indeed the dying of Others is seen often enough
as  a  social  inconvenience,  if  not  even  a  downright  tactlessness,  against
which the public is to be guarded.(xii)
 

xii.  In  his  story  ‘The  Death  of  Ivan  Ilyitch’  Leo  Tolstoi  has  presented  the  phenomenon  of  the

disruption and breakdown of having ‘someone die’.
 

1. ‘Und selbst im Falle des Ablebens noch soll die Öffentlichkeit durch das Ereignis nicht in ihrer

besorgten Sorglosigkeit gestört und beunruhigt werden.’

But  along  with  this  tranquilization,  which  forces  Dasein  away  from  its
death,  the  “they”  at  the  same  time  puts  itself  in  the  right  and  makes  itself
respectable  by  tacitly  regulating  the  way  in  which  one  has  to  comport
oneself  towards  death.  It  is  already  a  matter  of  public  acceptance  that
‘thinking about death’ is a cowardly fear, a sign of insecurity on the part of
Dasein, and a sombre way of fleeing from the world. The “they” does not
permit us the courage for anxiety in the face of death. The dominance of the
manner  in  which  things  have  been  publicly  interpreted  by  the  “they”,  has
already  decided  what  state-of-mind  is  to  determine  our  attitude  towards
death.  In  anxiety  in  the  face  of  death,  Dasein  is  brought  face  to  face  with
itself as delivered over to that possibility which is not to be outstripped. The
“they” concerns itself with transforming this anxiety into fear in the face of
an  oncoming  event.  In  addition,  the  anxiety  which  has  been  made
ambiguous as fear, is passed off as a weakness with which no self-assured
Dasein may have any acquaintance. What is ‘fitting’ [Was sich... “gehört”]
according to the unuttered decree of the “they”, is indifferent tranquillity as
to the ‘fact’ that one dies. The cultivation of such a ‘superior’ indifference
alienates Dasein from its ownmost non-relational potentiality-for-Being.

H. 255

 

But  temptation,  tranquilization,  and  alienation  are  distinguishing  marks
of the kind of Being called “falling”. As  falling, everyday  Being-towards-
death is a constant fleeing in the face of death.  Being-towards-the-end has
the  mode  of  evasion  in  the  face  of  it—giving  new  explanations  for  it,
understanding  it  inauthentically,  and  concealing  it.  Factically  one’s  own
Dasein is always dying already; that is to say, it is in a Being-towards-its-
end. And it hides this Fact from itself by recoining “death” as just a “case of
death” in  Others—an  everyday  occurrence which, if  need be, gives  us the
assurance still more plainly that ‘oneself’ is still ‘living’. But in thus falling
and fleeing in the face of death, Dasein’s everydayness attests that the very
“they” itself already has the definite character of Being-towards-death, even
when it is not explicitly engaged in ‘thinking about death’. Even in average
everydayness,  this  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being,  which  is  non-relational
and not to be outstripped, is constantly an issue for Dasein. This is the case
when  its  concern  is  merely  in  the  mode  of  an  untroubled  indifference
towards the uttermost possibility of existence.(1)

In  setting  forth  everyday  Being-towards-death,  however,  we  are  at  the
same time enjoined to try to secure a full existential conception of Being-
towards-the-end,  by  a  more  penetrating  Interpretation  in  which  falling
Being-towards-death is taken as an evasion in the face of death. That in the
face  of  which  one  flees  has  been  made  visible  in  a  way  which  is
phenomenally  adequate.  Against  this  it  must  be  possible  to  project
phenomenologically the way in which evasive Dasein itself understands its
death.(xiii)
 

xiii.  In  connection  with  this  methodological  possibility,  cf.  what  was  said  on  the  analysis  of

anxiety, Section 40, H. 184.

52.  Everyday  Being-towards-the-end,  and 

the  Full  Existential

Conception of Death
 

In  our  preliminary  existential  sketch,  Being-towards-the-end  has  been
defined  as  Being  towards  one’s  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being,  which  is
non-relational and is not to be outstripped. Being towards this possibility, as

a Being which exists, is brought face to face with the absolute impossibility
of  existence.  Beyond  this  seemingly  empty  characterization  of  Being-
towards-death,  there  has  been  revealed  the  concretion  of  this  Being  in  the
mode of everydayness. In accordance with the tendency to falling, which is
essential  to  everydayness,  Being-towards-death  has  turned  out  to  be  an
evasion  in  the  face  of  death—an  evasion  which  conceals.  While  our
investigation  has  hitherto  passed  from  a  formal  sketch  of  the  ontological
structure of death  to  the  concrete analysis of everyday  Being-towards-the-
end,  the  direction  is  now  to  be  reversed,  and  we  shall  arrive  at  the  full
existential  conception  of  death  by  rounding  out  our  Interpretation  of
everyday Being-towards-the-end.

In  explicating  everyday  Being-towards-death  we  have  clung  to  the  idle
talk  of  the  “they”  to  the  effect  that  “one  dies  too,  sometime,  but  not  right
away.”(2) All that we have Interpreted thus far is the ‘one dies’ as such. In
the ‘sometime, but not right away’, everydayness concedes something like a
certainty of death. Nobody doubts that one dies. On the other hand, this ‘not
doubting’  need not  imply  that kind  of Being-certain  which corresponds to
the  way  death—in  the  sense  of  the  distinctive  possibility  characterized
above—enters  into  Dasein.  Everydayness  confines  itself  to  conceding  the
‘certainty’ of death in this ambiguous manner just in order to weaken that
certainty  by  covering  up  dying  still  more  and  to  alleviate  its  own
thrownness into death.
 

1.  ‘…wenn  auch  nur  im  Modus  des  Besorgens  einer  unbehelligten  Gleichgültigkeit  gegen  die
äusserste  Möglichkeit  seiner  Existenz.’  Ordinarily  the  expression  ‘Gleichgültigkeit  gegen’  means
simply ‘indifference towards’. But Heidegger’s use of boldface type suggests that here he also has in
mind that ‘gegen’ may mean ‘against’ or ‘in opposition to’.
2. ‘…man stirbt auch einmal, aber vorläufig noch nicht.’

H. 256

 

By  its very meaning,  this evasive concealment  in  the  face  of death can
not be authentically  ‘certain’ of death, and yet  it is  certain of it. What are
we to say about the ‘certainty of death’?

To be certain of an entity means to hold it for true as something true.(1)
But  “truth”  signifies 
the  uncoveredness  of  some  entity,  and  all
uncoveredness  is  grounded  ontologically  in  the  most  primordial  truth,  the
disclosedness  of  Dasein.(xiv)  As  an  entity  which  is  both  disclosed  and

disclosing, and one which uncovers, Dasein is essentially ‘in the truth’. But
certainly  is  grounded  in  the  truth,  or  belongs  to  it  equiprimordially.  The
expression  ‘certainty’,  like  the  term  ‘truth’,  has  a  double  signification.
Primordially  “truth”  means  the  same  as  “Being-disclosive”,  as  a  way  in
which  Dasein  behaves.  From  this  comes  the  derivative  signification:  “the
uncoveredness  of  entities”.  Correspondingly,  “certainty”,  in  its  primordial
signification,  is  tantamount  to  “Being-certain”,  as  a  kind  of  Being  which
belongs  to  Dasein.  However,  in  a  derivative  signification,  any  entity  of
which Dasein can be certain will also get called something ‘certain’.

One  mode  of  certainty  is  conviction.  In  conviction,  Dasein  lets  the
testimony of the thing itself which has been uncovered (the true thing itself)
be the sole determinant for its Being towards that thing understandingly.(2)
Holding something for true is adequate as a way of maintaining oneself in
the  truth,  if  it  is  grounded  in  the  uncovered  entity  itself  and  if,  as  Being
towards  the  entity  so  uncovered,  it  has  become  transparent  to  itself  as
regards  its  appropriateness  to  that  entity.  In  any  arbitrary  fiction  or  in
merely having some ‘view’ [“Ansicht”] about an entity, this sort of thing is
lacking.
 

xiv. Cf. Section 44, H. 212 ff., especially H. 219 ff.

 

1. ‘Eines Seienden gewiss-sein besagt: es als wahres für wahr halten.’ The earlier editions have
‘Gewisssein’ instead of ‘gewiss-sein’. Our literal but rather unidiomatic translation of the phrase ‘für
wahr  halten’  seems  desirable  in  view  of  Heidegger’s  extensive  use  of  the  verb  ‘halten’  (‘hold’)  in
subsequent passages where this phrase occurs, though this is obscured by our translating ‘halten sich
in...’ as ‘maintain itself in...’ and ‘halten sich an...’ as ‘cling to...’ or ‘stick to…’.

2. ‘In ihr lässt sich das Dasein einzig durch das Zeugnis der entdeckten (wahre) Sache selbst sein
verstehendes Sein zu dieser bestimmen.’ The connection between ‘Überzeugung’ (‘conviction’) and
‘Zeugnis’ (testimony) is obscured in our translation.

The  adequacy  of  holding-for-true  is  measured  according  to  the  truth-
claim to which it belongs. Such a claim gets its justification from the kind
of  Being  of  the  entity  to  be  disclosed,  and  from  the  direction  of  the
disclosure. The kind of truth, and along with it, the certainty, varies with the
way entities differ, and accords with the guiding tendency and extent of the
disclosure.  Our  present  considerations  will  be  restricted  to  an  analysis  of
Being-certain  with  regard  to  death;  and  this  Being-certain  will  in  the  end
present us with a distinctive certainty of Dasein.

H. 257

For the most part, everyday Dasein covers up the ownmost possibility of
its Being—that possibility which is non-relational and not to be outstripped.
This  factical  tendency  to  cover  up  confirms  our  thesis  that  Dasein,  as
factical,  is  in  the  ‘untruth’.(xv)  Therefore  the  certainty  which  belongs  to
such a covering-up of Being-towards-death must be an inappropriate way of
holding-for-true,  and  not,  for  instance,  an  uncertainty  in  the  sense  of  a
doubting.  In  inappropriate  certainty,  that  of  which  one  is  certain  is  held
covered up. If ‘one’ understands death as an event which one encounters in
one’s environment, then the certainty which is related to such events does
not pertain to Being-towards-the-end.

They say, “It  is  certain that ‘Death’  is  coming.’(1) They say  it,  and  the
“they”  overlooks  the  fact  that  in  order  to  be  able  to  be  certain  of  death,
Dasein  itself  must  in  every  case  be  certain  of  its  own-most  non-relational
potentiality-for-Being. They say, “Death is certain”; and in saying so, they
implant in Dasein the illusion that it is itself certain of its death. And what is
the  ground  of  everyday  Being-certain?  Manifestly,  it  is  not  just  mutual
persuasion.  Yet  the  ‘dying’  of  Others  is  something  that  one  experiences
daily. Death is an undeniable ‘fact of experience’.
 

xv. Cf. Section 44 b H. 222.

1. ‘Man sagt: es ist gewiss, dass “der” Tod kommt.’

The  way  in  which  everyday  Being-towards-death  understands  the
certainty which is thus grounded, betrays itself when it tries to ‘think’ about
death,  even  when  it  does  so  with  critical  foresight—that  is  to  say,  in  an
appropriate manner. So far as one knows, all men ‘die’. Death is probable in
the  highest  degree  for  every  man,  yet  it  is  not  ‘unconditionally’  certain.
Taken  strictly,  a  certainty  which  is  ‘only’  empirical  may  be  attributed  to
death.  Such  certainty  necessarily  falls  short  of  the  highest  certainty,  the
apodictic, which we reach in certain domains of theoretical knowledge.

H. 258

 

 

 

In  this  ‘critical’  determination  of  the  certainty  of  death,  and  of  its
impendence, what is manifested in the first instance is, once again, a failure
to  recognize  Dasein’s  kind  of  Being  and  the  Being-towards-death  which
belongs to Dasein—a failure that is characteristic of everydayness. The fact
that demise, as an event which occurs, is ‘only’ empirically certain, is in no
way decisive as to the certainty of death. Cases of death may be the factical
occasion  for  Dasein’s  first  paying  attention  to  death  at  all.  So  long,
however,  as  Dasein  remains  in  the  empirical  certainty  which  we  have
mentioned, death, in the way that it ‘is’, is something of which Dasein can
by no means become certain. Even though, in the publicness of the “they”,
Dasein  seems  to  ‘talk’  only  of  this  ‘empirical’  certainty  of  death,
nevertheless  at  bottom  Dasein  does  not  exclusively  or  primarily  stick  to
those  cases  of  death  which  merely  occur.  In  evading  its  death,  even
everyday  Being-towards-the-end  is  indeed  certain  of  its  death  in  another
way  than  it  might  itself  like  to  have  true  on  purely  theoretical
considerations.  This  ‘other  way’  is  what  everydayness  for  the  most  part
veils  from  itself:  Everydayness  does  not  dare  to  let  itself  become
transparent in such a manner. We have already characterized the every-day
state-of-mind  which  consists  in  an  air  of  superiority  with  regard  to  the
certain ‘fact’ of death—a superiority which is ‘anxiously’ concerned while
this  state-of-mind,  everydayness
In 
seemingly 
acknowledges  a  ‘higher’  certainty  than  one  which  is  only  empirical.  One
knows about the certainty of death, and yet ‘is’ not authentically certain of
one’s  own.  The  falling  everydayness  of  Dasein  is  acquainted  with  death’s
certainty, and yet  evades Being-certain.  But  in  the  light  of  what  it  evades,
this  very  evasion  attests  phenomenally  that  death  must  be  conceived  as
one’s  ownmost  possibility,  non-relational,  not  to  be  outstripped,  and—
above all—certain.

from  anxiety. 

free 

One says, “Death certainly comes, but not right away”. With this ‘but...’,
the  “they”  denies  that  death  is  certain.  ‘Not  right  away’  is  not  a  purely
negative assertion, but a way in which the “they” interprets itself. With this
interpretation, the “they” refers itself to that which is proximally accessible
to Dasein and amenable to its concern. Everydayness forces its way into the
urgency  of  concern,  and  divests  itself  of  the  fetters  of  a  weary  ‘inactive
thinking  about  death’.  Death  is  deferred  to  ‘sometime  later’,  and  this  is
done by invoking the so-called ‘general opinion’ [“allgemeine Ermessen”].
Thus  the  “they”  covers  up  what  is  peculiar  in  death’s  certainty—that it  is

possible  at  any  moment.  Along  with  the  certainty  of  death  goes  the
indefiniteness  of  its  “when”.  Everyday  Being-towards-death  evades  this
indefiniteness  by  conferring  definiteness  upon  it.  But  such  a  procedure
cannot signify calculating when the demise is due to arrive. In the face of
definiteness  such  as  this,  Dasein  would  sooner  flee.  Everyday  concern
makes  definite  for  itself  the  indefiniteness  of  certain  death  by  interposing
before it those urgencies and possibilities which can be taken in at a glance,
and which belong to the everyday matters that are closest to us.

But when this indefiniteness has been covered up, the certainty has been
covered up too. Thus death’s ownmost character as a possibility gets veiled
—a possibility which is certain and at the same time indefinite—that is to
say, possible at any moment.

Now that we have completed our Interpretation of the everyday manner
in which the “they” talks about death and the way death enters into Dasein,
we have been led to the characters of certainty and indefiniteness. The full
existential-ontological conception of death may now be defined as follows:
death,  as  the  end  of  Dasein,  is  Dasein’s  ownmost  possibility—non-
relational, certain and as such indefinite, not to be outstripped. Death is, as
Dasein’s end, in the Being of this entity towards its end.

H. 259

 

this 

that 

end, 

conclusive 

Defining  the  existential  structure  of  Being-towards-the-end  helps  us  to
work out a kind of Being of Dasein in which Dasein, as Dasein,  can be a
whole. The fact that even everyday Dasein already is towards its end—that
is to say, is constantly coming to grips with its death, though in a ‘fugitive’
and
manner—shows 
determinative  for  Being-a-whole,  is  not  something  to  which  Dasein
ultimately comes only in its demise. In Dasein, as being towards its death,
its  own  uttermost  “not-yet”  has  already  been  included—that  “not-yet”
which  all  others  lie  ahead  of.(1)  So  if  one  has  given  an  ontologically
inappropriate  Interpretation  of  Dasein’s  “not-yet”  as  something  still
outstanding, any formal inference from this to Dasein’s lack of totality will
not be correct. The phenomenon of the “not-yet” has been taken over from
the  “ahead-of-itself”;  no  more  than  the  care-structure  in  general,  can  it
serve  as  a  higher  court  which  would  rule  against  the  possibility  of  an
existent  Being-a-whole;  indeed  this  “ahead-of-itself”  is  what  first  of  all

[abschliessende] 

makes such a Being-towards-the-end possible. The problem of the possible
Being-a-whole of that entity which each of us is, is a correct one if care, as
Dasein’s basic state, is ‘connected’ with death—the uttermost possibility for
that entity.
 

1. ‘…dem alle anderen vorgelagert sind...’ This clause is ambiguous, both in the German and in
our translation, though the point is fairly clear. The ultimate ‘not-yet’ is not one which all others ‘lie
ahead of’ in the sense that they lie beyond it or come after it; for nothing can ‘lie ahead of it’ in this
sense.  But  they  can ‘lie  ahead  of  it’  in  the  sense  that  they  might  be  actualized  before  the  ultimate
‘not-yet’  has  been  actualized.  (Contrast  this  passage  with  H.  302,  where  the  same  participle
‘vorgelagert’ is apparently applied in the former sense to death itself.)

Meanwhile, it remains questionable whether this problem has been as yet
adequately worked out. Being-towards-death is grounded in care. Dasein, as
thrown Being-in-the-world, has in every case already been delivered over to
its death. In being towards its death, Dasein is dying factically and indeed
constantly, as long as it has not yet come to its demise. When we say that
Dasein is factically dying, we are saying at the same time that in its Being-
towards-death Dasein has always decided itself in one way or another. Our
everyday  falling  evasion  in  the  face  of  death  is  an  inauthentic  Being-
towards-death. But inauthenticity is based on the possibility of authenticity.
(xvi)  Inauthenticity  characterizes  a  kind  of  Being  into  which  Dasein  can
divert itself and has for the most part always diverted itself; but Dasein does
not necessarily and constantly have to divert itself into this kind of Being.
Because Dasein exists, it determines its own character as the kind of entity
it is, and it does so in every case in terms of a possibility which it itself is
and which it understands.(1)
 

xvi. The inauthenticity of Dasein has been handled in Section 9 (H. 42 ff.), Section 27 (H. 130),

1. ‘Weil das Dasein existiert, bestimmt es sich als Seiendes, wie es ist, je aus einer Möglichkeit,

and especially Section 38 (H. 175 ff.).
 

die es selbst ist und versteht.’

H. 260

 

Can Dasein also understand authentically its ownmost possibility, which
is  non-relational  and  not  to  be  outstripped,  which  is  certain  and,  as  such,
indefinite?  That  is,  can  Dasein  maintain  itself  in  an  authentic  Being-

towards-its-end?  As  long  as  this  authentic  Being-towards-death  has  not
been  set  forth  and  ontologically  defined,  there  is  something  essentially
lacking in our existential Interpretation of Being-towards-the-end.

Authentic  Being-towards-death  signifies  an  existentiell  possibility  of
Dasein.  This  ontical  potentiality-for-Being  must,  in  turn,  be  ontologically
possible.  What  are  the  existential  conditions  of  this  possibility?  How  are
they themselves to become accessible?

53. Existential Projection of an Authentic Being-towards-death

 

Factically, Dasein maintains itself proximally and for the most part in an
inauthentic  Being-towards-death.  How  is  the  ontological  possibility  of  an
authentic Being-towards-death  to  be  characterized  ‘Objectively’,  if,  in  the
end,  Dasein  never  comports  itself  authentically  towards  its  end,  or  if,  in
accordance with its very meaning, this authentic Being must remain hidden
from the  Others?  Is it not  a fanciful  undertaking,  to  project  the  existential
possibility of so questionable an existentiell potentiality-for-Being? What is
needed,  if  such  a  projection  is  to  go  beyond  a  merely  fictitious  arbitrary
construction? Does Dasein itself give us any instructions for carrying it out?
And can any grounds for its phenomenal legitimacy be taken from Dasein
itself? Can our analysis of Dasein up to this point give us any prescriptions
for  the  ontological  task  we  have  now  set  ourselves,  so  that  what  we  have
before us may be kept on a road of which we can be sure?

The existential conception of death has been established; and therewith
we have also established what it is that an authentic Being-towards-the-end
should  be  able  to  comport  itself  towards.  We  have  also  characterized
inauthentic Being-towards-death, and thus we have prescribed in a negative
way [prohibitiv] how it is possible for authentic Being-towards-death not to
be. It is with these positive and prohibitive instructions that the existential
edifice of an authentic Being-towards-death must let itself be projected.

Dasein is constituted by disclosedness—that is, by an understanding with
a state-of-mind. Authentic Being-towards-death can not evade its own-most
non-relational possibility, or cover  up  this possibility by thus  fleeing  from
it, or give a new explanation for it to accord with the common sense of the
“they”.  In  our  existential  projection  of  an  authentic  Being-towards-death,
therefore,  we  must  set  forth  those  items  in  such  a  Being  which  are

constitutive  for  it  as  an  understanding  of  death—and  as  such  an
understanding in the sense of Being towards this possibility without either
fleeing it or covering it up.

H. 261

 

In  the  first  instance,  we  must  characterize  Being-towards-death  as  a
Being  towards  a  possibility—indeed,  towards  a  distinctive  possibility  of
Dasein  itself.  “Being  towards”  a  possibility—that  is  to  say,  towards
something possible—may signify “Being out for” something possible, as in
concerning ourselves with its actualization. Such possibilities are constantly
encountered  in  the  field  of  what  is  ready-to-hand  and  present-at-hand—
what  is  attainable,  controllable,  practicable,  and  the  like.  In  concernfully
Being  out  for  something  possible,  there  is  a  tendency  to  annihilate  the
possibility of the possible by making it available to us. But the concernful
actualization  of  equipment  which  is  ready-to-hand  (as  in  producing  it,
getting  it  ready,  readjusting  it,  and  so  on)  is  always  merely  relative,  since
even that which has been actualized is still characterized in terms of some
involvements—indeed  this  is  precisely  what  characterizes  its  Being.  Even
though  actualized,  it  remains,  as  actual,  something  possible  for  doing
something;  it  is  characterized  by  an  “in-order-to”.  What  our  analysis  is  to
make plain is simply how Being out for something concernfully, comports
itself  towards  the  possible:  it  does  so  not  by  the  theoretico-thematical
consideration  of  the  possible  as  possible,  and  by  having  regard  for  its
possibility  as  such,  but  rather  by  looking  circumspectively away  from  the
possible and looking at that for which it is possible [das Wofür-möglich].

Manifestly Being-towards-death, which is now in question, cannot have
the  character  of  concernfully  Being  out  to  get  itself  actualized.  For  one
thing, death as possible is not something possible which is ready-to-hand or
present-at-hand, but a possibility of Dasein’s Being.  So  to  concern  oneself
with  actualizing  what  is  thus  possible  would  have  to  signify,  “bringing
about one’s demise”. But if this were done, Dasein would deprive itself of
the very ground for an existing Being-towards-death.

Thus,  if  by  “Being  towards  death”  we  do  not  have  in  view  an
‘actualizing’  of  death,  neither  can  we  mean  “dwelling  upon  the  end  in  its
possibility”. This is the way one comports oneself when one ‘thinks about
death’,  pondering  over  when  and  how  this  possibility  may  perhaps  be

actualized.  Of  course  such  brooding  over  death  does  not  fully  take  away
from it its character as a possibility. Indeed, it always gets brooded over as
something that is coming; but in such brooding we weaken it by calculating
how we are to have it at our disposal. As something possible, it is to show
as little as possible of its possibility. On the other hand, if Being-towards-
death  has  to  disclose  understandingly  the  possibility  which  we  have
characterized, and if it is to disclose it as a possibility, then in such Being-
towards-death this possibility must not be weakened: it must be understood
as a possibility, it  must  be  cultivated as  a  possibility, and  we  must put  up
with it as a possibility, in the way we comport ourselves towards it.

H. 262

 

However,  Dasein  comports  itself  towards  something  possible  in  its
possibility  by  expecting  it  [im  Erwarten]  .  Anyone  who  is  intent  on
something  possible,  may  encounter  it  unimpeded  and  undiminished  in  its
‘whether  it  comes  or  does  not,  or  whether  it  comes  after  all’.(1)  But  with
this phenomenon of expecting, has not our analysis reached the same kind
of Being towards the possible to which we have already called attention in
our  description  of  “Being  out  for  something”  concernfully?  To  expect
something possible is always to understand it and to ‘have’ it with regard to
whether and when and how it will be actually present-at-hand. Expecting is
not  just  an  occasional  looking-away  from  the  possible  to  its  possible
actualization, but is essentially a waiting for that actualization [ein Warten
auf diese]. Even in expecting, one leaps away from the possible and gets a
foothold in the actual. It is for its actuality that what is expected is expected.
By  the  very  nature  of  expecting,  the  possible  is  drawn  into  the  actual,
arising out of the actual and returning to it.(2)

But  Being  towards  this  possibility,  as  Being-towards-death,  is  so  to
comport ourselves towards death that in this Being, and for it, death reveals
itself  as  a  possibility.  Our  terminology  for  such  Being  towards  this
possibility  is  “anticipation”  of  this  possibility.(3)  But  in  this  way  of
behaving does there not lurk a coming-close to the possible, and when one
is  close  to  the  possible,  does  not  its  actualization  emerge?  In  this  kind  of
coming  close,  however,  one  does  not  tend  towards  concernfully  making
available  something  actual;  but  as  one  comes  closer  understandingly,  the
possibility  of  the  possible  just  becomes  ‘greater’.  The  closest  closeness

which  one  may  have  in  Being  towards  death  as  a  possibility,  is  as  far  as
possible  from  anything  actual.  The  more  unveiledly  this  possibility  gets
understood, the more purely does the understanding penetrate into it as the
possibility of the impossibility of any existence at all. Death, as possibility,
gives  Dasein  nothing  to  be  ‘actualized’,  nothing  which  Dasein,  as  actual,
could  itself  be.  It  is  the  possibility  of  the  impossibility  of  every  way  of
comporting  oneself  towards  anything,  of  every  way  of  existing.  In  the
anticipation  of  this  possibility  it  becomes  ‘greater  and  greater’;  that  is  to
say, the possibility reveals itself to be such that it knows no measure at all,
no  more  or  less,  but  signifies  the  possibility  of  the  measureless
impossibility  of  existence.  In  accordance  with  its  essence,  this  possibility
offers no support for becoming intent on something, ‘picturing’ to oneself
the  actuality  which  is  possible,  and  so  forgetting  its  possibility.  Being-
towards-death,  as  anticipation  of  possibility,  is  what  first  makes  this
possibility possible, and sets it free as possibility.
 

1. ‘Für ein Gespanntsein auf es vermag ein Mögliches in seinem “ob oder nicht oder schliesslich

doch” ungehindert und ungeschmälert zu begegnen.’

2. ‘Auch im Erwarten liegt ein Abspringen vom Möglichen und Fussfassen im Wirklichen, dafür
das  Erwartete  erwartet  ist.  Vom  Wirklichen  aus  und  auf  es  zu  wird  das  Mögliche  in  das  Wirkliche
erwartungsmässig hereingezogen.’

3.  ‘...Vorlaufen  in  die  Möglichkeit.’  While  we  have  used  ‘anticipate’  to  translate  ‘vorgreifen’,
which  occurs  rather  seldom,  we  shall  also  use  it—less  literally—to  translate  ‘vorlaufen’,  which
appears very often in the following pages, and which has the special connotation of ‘running ahead’.
But  as  Heidegger’s  remarks  have  indicated,  the  kind  of  ‘anticipation’  which  is  involved  in  Being-
towards-death, does not consist in ‘waiting for’ death or ‘dwelling upon it’ or ‘actualizing’ it before
it normally comes; nor does ‘running ahead into it’ in this sense mean that we ‘rush headlong into it’.

H. 263

 

Being-towards-death is the anticipation of a potentiality-for-being of that
entity  whose  kind  of  Being  is  anticipation  itself.(1)  In  the  anticipatory
revealing  of  this  potentiality-for-Being,  Dasein  discloses  itself  to  itself  as
regards  its  uttermost  possibility.  But  to  project  itself  on  its  ownmost
potentiality-for-Being means to be able to understand itself in the Being of
the  entity  so  revealed—namely,  to  exist.  Anticipation  turns  out  to  be  the
possibility  of  understanding  one’s  ownmost and  uttermost  potentiality-for-
Being—that is to say, the possibility of authentic existence. The ontological
constitution  of  such  existence  must  be  made  visible  by  setting  forth  the
concrete  structure  of  anticipation  of  death.  How  are  we  to  delimit  this

structure  phenomenally?  Manifestly,  we  must  do  so  by  determining  those
characteristics which must belong to an anticipatory disclosure so that it can
become  the  pure  understanding  of  that  ownmost  possibility  which  is  non-
relational  and  not  to  be  outstripped—which  is  certain  and,  as  such,
indefinite. It must be noted that understanding does not primarily mean just
gazing  at  a  meaning,  but  rather  understanding  oneself  in  that  potentiality-
for-Being which reveals itself in projection.(xvii)
 

xvii. Cf. Section 31, H. 142 ff.

 

1. ‘…dessen Seinsart das Vorlaufen selbst ist.’ The earlier editions have ‘hat’ instead of ‘ist’.

Death  is  Dasein’s  ownmost  possibility.  Being  towards  this  possibility
discloses  to  Dasein  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being,  in  which  its  very
Being  is  the  issue.  Here  it  can  become  manifest  to  Dasein  that  in  this
distinctive possibility of its own self, it has been wrenched away from the
“they”. This means that in anticipation any Dasein can have wrenched itself
away  from  the  “they”  already.  But  when  one  understands  that  this  is
something  which  Dasein  ‘can’  have  done,  this  only  reveals  its  factical
lostness in the everydayness of the they-self.

The ownmost possibility is non-relational. Anticipation allows Dasein to
understand that that potentiality-for-being in which its ownmost Being is an
issue, must be taken over by Dasein alone. Death does not just ‘belong’ to
one’s  own  Dasein  in  an  undifferentiated  way;  death  lays  claim  to  it  as  an
individual Dasein.  The  non-relational  character  of  death,  as  understood  in
anticipation, individualizes Dasein down to itself. This individualizing is a
way in which the ‘there’ is disclosed for existence. It makes manifest that
all  Being-alongside  the  things  with  which  we  concern  ourselves,  and  all
Being-with Others, will fail us when our ownmost potentiality-for-Being is
the issue. Dasein can be authentically itself only if it makes this possible for
itself of its own accord. But if concern and solicitude fail us, this does not
signify  at  all  that  these  ways  of  Dasein  have  been  cut  off  from  its
authentically Being-its-Self. As structures essential to Dasein’s constitution,
these  have  a  share  in  conditioning  the  possibility  of  any  existence
whatsoever.  Dasein  is  authentically  itself  only  to  the  extent  that,  as
concernful  Being-alongside  and  solicitous  Being-with,  it  projects  itself
upon its ownmost potentiality-for-Being rather than upon the possibility of

the  they-self.  The  entity  which  anticipates  its  non-relational  possibility,  is
thus forced by that very anticipation into the possibility of taking over from
itself its ownmost Being, and doing so of its own accord.

H. 264

 

The ownmost,  non-relational possibility is not  to  be  outstripped.  Being
towards  this  possibility  enables  Dasein  to  understand  that  giving  itself  up
impends  for  it  as  the  uttermost  possibility  of  its  existence.  Anticipation,
however,  unlike  inauthentic  Being-towards-death,  does  not  evade  the  fact
that  death  is  not  to  be  outstripped;  instead,  anticipation  frees  itself  for
accepting  this.  When,  by  anticipation,  one  becomes  free  for  one’s  own
death, one is liberated from one’s lostness in those possibilities which may
accidentally thrust themselves upon one; and one is liberated in such a way
that  for  the  first  time  one  can  authentically  understand  and  choose  among
the  factical  possibilities  lying  ahead  of  that  possibility  which  is  not  to  be
outstripped.(1)  Anticipation  discloses  to  existence  that  its  uttermost
possibility lies in giving itself up, and thus it shatters all one’s tenaciousness
to whatever existence one has reached. In anticipation, Dasein guards itself
against falling back behind itself, or behind the potentiality-for-Being which
it has understood. It guards itself against ‘becoming too old for its victories’
(Nietzsche). Free for its ownmost possibilities, which are determined by the
end  and  so  are  understood  as  finite  [endliche],  Dasein  dispels  the  danger
that  it  may,  by  its  own  finite  understanding  of  existence,  fail  to  recognize
that  it  is  getting  outstripped  by  the  existence-possibilities  of  Others,  or
rather  that  it  may  explain  these  possibilities  wrongly  and  force  them  back
upon its own, so that it may divest itself of its ownmost factical existence.
As  the  non-relational  possibility,  death  individualizes—but  only  in  such  a
manner  that,  as  the  possibility  which  is  not  to  be  outstripped,  it  makes
Dasein,  as  Being-with,  have  some  understanding  of  the  potentiality-for-
Being  of  Others.  Since  anticipation  of  the  possibility  which  is  not  to  be
outstripped  discloses  also  all  the  possibilities  which  lie  ahead  of  that
possibility, this anticipation  includes  the  possibility of taking the whole of
Dasein  in  advance  [Vorwegnehmens]  in  an  existentiell  manner;  that  is  to
say, it includes the possibility of existing as a whole potentiality-for-Being.
 

1. ‘…die der unüberholbaren vorgelagert sind.’ See note 1, H. 259 above.

The ownmost, non-relational possibility, which is not to be outstripped,
is certain. The  way  to  be  certain  of  it  is  determined  by  the  kind  of  truth
which  corresponds  to  it  (disclosedness).  The  certain  possibility  of  death,
however, discloses Dasein as a possibility, but does so only in such a way
that,  in  anticipating  this  possibility,  Dasein  makes  this  possibility  possible
for  itself  as  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.(1)  The  possibility  is
disclosed because it is made possible in anticipation. To maintain oneself in
this  truth—that  is,  to  be  certain  of  what  has  been  disclosed—demands  all
the  more  that  one  should  anticipate.  We  cannot  compute  the  certainty  of
death by ascertaining how many cases of death we encounter. This certainty
is by no means of the kind which maintains itself in the truth of the present-
at-hand.  When  something  present-at-hand  has  been  uncovered,  it  is
encountered  most  purely  if  we  just  look  at  the  entity  and  let  it  be
encountered  in  itself.  Dasein  must  first  have  lost  itself  in  the  factual
circumstances  [Sachverhalte]  (this  can  be  one  of  care’s  own  tasks  and
possibilities)  if  it  is  to  obtain  the  pure  objectivity—that  is  to  say,  the
indifference—of  apodictic  evidence.  If  Being-certain  in  relation  to  death
does not have this character, this does not mean that it is of a lower grade,
but that it does not belong at all to the graded order of the kinds of evidence
we can have about the present-at-hand.
 

1. ‘Die gewisse Möglichkeit des Todes erschliesst das Dasein aber als Möglichkeit nur so, dass es
vorlaufend  zu  ihr  diese  Möglichkeit  als  eigenstes  Seinkönnen  für  sich  ermöglicht.’ While  we  have
taken ‘Die gewisse Möglichkeit des Todes’ as the subject of this puzzling sentence, ‘das Dasein’ may
be  the  subject  instead.  The  use  of  the  preposition  ‘zu’  instead  of  the  usual  ‘in’  after  ‘vorlaufend’
suggests that in ‘anticipating’ the possibility of death, Dasein is here thought of as ‘running ahead’
towards it  or up to it  rather  than  into  it.  When  this  construction  occurs  in  later  passages,  we  shall
indicate it by subjoining ‘zu’ in brackets.

H. 265

 

Holding  death for  true (death is  just  one’s  own)  shows  another  kind  of
certainty, and is more primordial than any certainty which relates to entities
encountered  within-the-world,  or  to  formal  objects;  for  it  is  certain  of
Being-in-the-world.  As  such,  holding  death  for  true  does  not  demand  just
one definite kind of behaviour in Dasein, but demands Dasein itself in the
full authenticity of its existence.(xviii) In anticipation Dasein can first make
certain  of  its  ownmost  Being  in  its  totality—a  totality  which  is  not  to  be
outstripped.  Therefore  the  evidential  character  which  belongs  to  the

immediate givenness of Experiences, of the “I”, or of consciousness, must
necessarily lag behind the certainty which anticipation includes. Yet this is
not  because  the  way  in  which  these  are  grasped  would  not  be  a  rigorous
one, but because in principle such a way of grasping them cannot hold for
true (disclosed) something which at bottom it insists upon ‘having there’ as
true: namely, Dasein itself which I myself am, and which, as a potentiality-
for-Being, I can be authentically only by anticipation.
 

xviii. Cf. Section 62, H. 305 ff.

H. 266

 

The ownmost possibility, which is non-relational, not to be outstripped,
and  certain,  is  indefinite  as  regards  its  certainty.  How  does  anticipation
disclose this characteristic of Dasein’s distinctive possibility? How does the
anticipatory  understanding  project  itself  upon  a  potentiality-for-Being
which  is  certain  and  which  is  constantly  possible  in  such  a  way  that  the
“when”  in  which  the  utter  impossibility  of  existence  becomes  possible
remains constantly indefinite? In anticipating [zum] the indefinite certainty
of  death,  Dasein  opens  itself  to  a  constant  threat  arising  out  of  its  own
“there”. In this very threat Being-towards-the-end must maintain itself. So
little can it tone this down that it must rather cultivate the indefiniteness of
the  certainty.  How  is  it  existentially  possible  for  this  constant  threat  to  be
genuinely disclosed? All understanding is accompanied by a state-of-mind.
Dasein’s  mood  brings  it  face  to  face  with  the  thrownness  of  its  ‘that  it  is
there’.(xix)  But  the  state-of-mind  which  can  hold  open  the  utter  and
constant  threat  to  itself  arising  from  Dasein’s  ownmost  individualized
Being,  is  anxiety.(xx)(1)  In  this  state-of-mind,  Dasein  finds  itself  face  to
face  with  the  “nothing”  of  the  possible  impossibility  of  its  existence.
Anxiety is anxious about the potentiality-for-Being of the entity so destined
[des  so  bestimmten  Seienden],  and  in  this  way  it  discloses  the  uttermost
possibility. Anticipation utterly individualizes Dasein, and allows it, in this
individualization  of  itself,  to  become  certain  of  the  totality  of  its
potentiality-for-Being.  For  this  reason,  anxiety  as  a  basic  state-of-mind
belongs to such a self-understanding of Dasein on the basis of Dasein itself.
is  attested
(2)  Being-towards-death 
unmistakably, though ‘only’ indirectly, by Being-towards-death as we have

is  essentially  anxiety.  This 

described  it,  when  it  perverts  anxiety  into  cowardly  fear  and,  in
surmounting this fear, only makes known its own cowardliness in the face
of anxiety.
 

xix. Cf. Section 29, H. 134 ff.
xx. Cf. Section 40, H. 184 ff.

 

1.  ‘Die  Befindlichkeit  aber,  welche  die  ständige  und  schlechthinnige,  aus  dem  eigensten
vereinzelten Sein des Dasiens aufsteigende Bedrohung seiner selbst offen zu halten vermag, ist die
Angst.’  Notice  that  ‘welche’  may  be  construed  either  as  the  subject  or  as  the  direct  object  of  the
relative clause.

2.  ‘…gehört  zu  diesem  Sichverstehen  des  Daseins  aus  seinem  Grunde  die  Grundbefindlichkeit

der Angst.’ It is not grammatically clear whether ‘seinem’ refers to ‘Sichverstehen’ or to ‘Daseins’.

We  may  now  summarize  our  characterization  of  authentic  Being-
towards-death as we have projected it existentially: anticipation reveals to
Dasein  its  lostness  in  the  they-self,  and  brings  it  face  to  face  with  the
possibility  of  being  itself,  primarily  unsupported  by  concernful  solicitude,
but  of  being  itself,  rather,  in  an  impassioned  freedom  towards  death—a
freedom  which  has  been  released  from  the  Illusions  of  the  “they”,  and
which is factical, certain of itself, and anxious.

All the relationships which belong to Being-towards-death, up to the full
content  of  Dasein’s  uttermost  possibility,  as  we  have  characterized  it,
constitute an anticipation which they combine in revealing, unfolding, and
holding  fast,  as  that  which  makes  this  possibility  possible.  The  existential
projection  in  which  anticipation  has  been  delimited,  has  made  visible  the
ontological  possibility  of  an  existentiell  Being-towards-death  which  is
authentic.  Therewith,  however,  the  possibility  of  Dasein’s  having  an
authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole  emerges,  but  only  as  an
ontological possibility. In our existential projection of anticipation, we have
of  course  clung  to  those  structures  of  Dasein  which  we  have  arrived  at
earlier,  and  we  have,  as  it  were,  let  Dasein  itself  project  itself  upon  this
possibility,  without  holding  up  to  Dasein  an  ideal  of  existence  with  any
special  ‘content’,  or  forcing  any  such  ideal  upon  it  ‘from  outside’.
Nevertheless,  this  existentially  ‘possible’  Being-towards-death  remains,
from  the  existentiell  point  of  view,  a  fantastical  exaction.  The  fact  that  an
is  ontologically  possible  for
authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole 
Dasein,  signifies  nothing,  so  long  as  a  corresponding  ontical  potentiality-
for-Being  has  not  been  demonstrated  in  Dasein  itself.  Does  Dasein  ever

factically  throw  itself  into  such  a  Being-towards-death?  Does  Dasein
demand, even  by  reason  of  its  own-most  Being,  an  authentic  potentiality-
for-Being determined by anticipation?

H. 267

 

Before  answering  these  questions,  we  must  investigate  whether  to  any
extent  and  in  any  way  Dasein  gives  testimony,  from  its  ownmost
potentiality-for-Being, as to a possible authenticity of its existence, so that it
not  only  makes  known  that  in  an  existentiell  manner  such  authenticity  is
possible, but demands this of itself.

The question  of Dasein’s authentic Being-a-whole and of its existential
constitution  still  hangs  in  mid-air.  It  can  be  put  on  a  phenomenal  basis
which will stand the test only if it can cling to a possible authenticity of its
Being which is attested by Dasein itself. If we succeed in uncovering that
attestation  phenomenologically,  together  with  what  it  attests,  then  the
problem  will  arise  anew  as  to  whether  the  anticipation  of  [zum]  death,
which we have hitherto projected only in its ontological possibility, has an
essential  connection  with  that  authentic  potentiality-for-Being  which  has
been attested.

II: DASEIN’S ATTESTATION OF AN AUTHENTIC
POTENTIALITY-FOR-BEING, AND RESOLUTENESS

 

 

 

54.  The  Problem  of  How  an  Authentic  Existentiell  Possibility  is

Attested.
 

WHAT we  are  seeking is  an authentic potentiality-for-Being  of Dasein,
which will be attested in its existentiell possibility by Dasein itself. But this
very attestation must first be such that we can find it. If in this attestation,
Dasein itself, as something for  which authentic existence is  possible,  is  to
be ‘given’ to Dasein ‘to understand’,(1) this attestation will have its roots in
Dasein’s  Being.  So  in  exhibiting  it  phenomenologically,  we  include  a
demonstration that in Dasein’s state of Being it has its source.

In  this  attestation  an  authentic  potentiality-for-Being-one’s-Self  is  to  be
given  us  to  understand.  The  question  of  the  “who”  of  Dasein  has  been
answered with the expression ‘Self’.(i) Dasein’s Selfhood has been defined
formally as a way of existing, and therefore not as an entity present-at-hand.
For the most part I myself am not the “who” of Dasein; the they-self is its
“who”. Authentic Being-one’s-Self takes the definite form of an existentiell
modification  of  the  “they”;  and  this  modification  must  be  defined
existentially.(ii)  What  does  this  modification  imply,  and  what  are  the
ontological conditions for its possibility?
 

i. Cf. Section 25, H. 114 ff.
ii. Cf. Section 27, H. 126 ff., especially H. 130.

1.  ‘…wenn  sie  dem  Dasein  es  selbst  in  seiner  möglichen  eigentlichen  Existenz  “zu  verstehen

geben”...’

H. 268

With Dasein’s lostness in the “they”, that factical potentiality-for-Being
which is closest to it (the tasks, rules, and standards, the urgency and extent,

of concernful  and solicitous Being-in-the-world) has already been decided
upon.  The  “they”  has  always  kept  Dasein  from  taking  hold  of  these
possibilities  of  Being.  The  “they”  even  hides  the  manner  in  which  it  has
tacitly  relieved  Dasein  of  the  burden  of  explicitly  choosing  these
possibilities.  It  remains  indefinite  who  has  ‘really’  done  the  choosing.  So
Dasein  make  no  choices,  gets  carried  along  by  the  nobody,  and  thus
ensnares itself in inauthenticity. This process can be reversed only if Dasein
specifically  brings  itself  back  to  itself  from  its  lostness  in  the  “they”.  But
this  bringing-back  must  have  that  kind  of  Being  by  the  neglect  of  which
Dasein has lost itself in inauthenticity. When Dasein thus brings itself back
[Das  Sichzurückholen]  from  the  “they”,  the  they-self  is  modified  in  an
existentiell  manner  so  that  it  becomes  authentic  Being-one’s-Self.  This
must  be  accomplished  by  making  up  for  not  choosing  [Nachholen  einer
Wahl]. But  “making  up”  for  not  choosing  signifies  choosing  to  make  this
choice—deciding  for  a  potentiality-for-Being,  and  making  this  decision
from  one’s  own  Self.  In  choosing  to  make  this  choice,  Dasein  makes
possible, first and foremost, its authentic potentiality-for-Being.

But because Dasein is lost in the “they”, it must first find itself. In order
to find itself at all, it must be ‘shown’ to itself in its possible authenticity. In
terms  of  its  possibility, Dasein  is  already  a  potentiality-for-Being-its-Self,
but it needs to have this potentiality attested.

In  the  following  Interpretation  we  shall  claim  that  this  potentiality  is
attested  by  that  which,  in  Dasein’s  everyday  interpretation  of  itself,  is
familiar  to  us  as  the  “voice  of  conscience”  [Stimme  des  Gewissens].(iii)
That the very ‘fact’ of conscience has been disputed, that its function as a
higher  court  for  Dasein’s  existence  has  been  variously  assessed,  and  that
‘what  conscience  says’  has  been  interpreted  in  manifold  ways—all  this
might  only  mislead  us  into  dismissing  this  phenomenon  if  the  very
‘doubtfulness’ of this Fact—or of the way in which it has been interpreted
—did  not prove  that  here  a  primordial phenomenon  of  Dasein  lies  before
us. In the following analysis conscience will be taken as something which
we  have  in  advance  theoretically,  and  it  will  be  investigated  in  a  purely
existential manner, with fundamental ontology as our aim.
 

iii.  These  observations  and  those  which  follow  after  were  communicated  as  theses  on  the

occasion of a public lecture on the concept of time, which was given at Marburg in July 1924.

H. 269

 

We  shall  first  trace  conscience  back  to  its  existential  foundations  and
structures and make it visible as a phenomenon of Dasein, holding fast to
what  we  have  hitherto  arrived  at  as  that  entity’s  state  of  Being.  The
ontological analysis of conscience on which we are thus embarking, is prior
to  any  description  and  classification  of  Experiences  of  conscience,  and
likewise  lies  outside  of  any  biological  ‘explanation’  of  this  phenomenon
(which  would  mean  its  dissolution).  But  it  is  no  less  distant  from  a
theological exegesis of conscience or any employment of this phenomenon
for proofs of God or for establishing an ‘immediate’ consciousness of God.
Nevertheless,  even  when  our  investigation  of  conscience  is  thus
restricted,  we  must  neither  exaggerate  its  outcome  nor  make  perverse
claims  about  it  and  lessen  its  worth.  As  a  phenomenon  of  Dasein,
conscience  is  not  just  a  fact  which  occurs  and  is  occasionally  present-at-
hand. It ‘is’ only in Dasein’s kind of Being, and it makes itself known as a
Fact  only  with  factical  existence  and  in  it.  The  demand  that  an  ‘inductive
empirical proof’ should be given for the ‘factuality’ of conscience and for
the  legitimacy  of  its  ‘voice’,  rests  upon  an  ontological  perversion  of  the
phenomenon.  This  perversion,  however,  is  one  that  is  shared  by  every
“superior”  criticism  in  which  conscience  is  taken  as  something  just
occurring  from  time  to  time  rather  than  as  a  ‘universally  established  and
ascertainable  fact’.  Among  such  proofs  and  counterproofs,  the  Fact  of
conscience cannot present itself at all. This is no lack in it, but merely a sign
by which we can recognize it as ontologically of a different kind from what
is environmentally present-at-hand.

to 

into 

take 

it  back 

Conscience  gives  us  ‘something’  to  understand;  it  discloses.  By
characterizing  this  phenomenon  formally  in  this  way,  we  find  ourselves
enjoined 
the  disclosedness  of  Dasein.  This
disclosedness,  as  a  basic  state  of  that  entity  which  we  ourselves  are,  is
constituted  by  state-of-mind,  understanding,  falling,  and  discourse.  If  we
analyse conscience more penetratingly, it is revealed as a call [Ruf]. Calling
is  a  mode  of  discourse.  The  call  of  conscience  has  the  character  of  an
appeal to Dasein by calling it to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-Self;
and this is done by way of summoning it to its ownmost Being-guilty.(1)

H. 270

 

This  existential  Interpretation  is  necessarily  a  far  cry  from  everyday
ontical  common  sense,  though  it  sets  forth  the  ontological  foundations  of
what  the  ordinary  way  of  interpreting  conscience  has  always  understood
within  certain  limits  and  has  conceptualized  as  a  ‘theory’  of  conscience.
Accordingly  our  existential  Interpretation  needs  to  be  confirmed  by  a
critique of the way in which conscience is ordinarily interpreted. When this
phenomenon  has  been  exhibited,  we  can  bring  out  the  extent  to  which  it
attests  an  authentic  potentiality-for-Being  of  Dasein.  To  the  call  of
conscience there corresponds a possible hearing. Our understanding of the
appeal  unveils 
to  have  a  conscience
[Gewissenhabenwollen].  But  in  this  phenomenon  lies  that  existentiell
choosing  which  we  seek—the  choosing  to  choose  a  kind  of  Being-one’s-
Self  which, 
its  existential  structure,  we  call
“resoluteness”.(2)  Thus  we  can  see  how  the  analyses  of  this  chapter  are
divided  up:  the  existential-ontological  foundations  of  conscience  (Section
55); the character of conscience as a call (Section 56); conscience as the call
of  care  (Section  57);  understanding  the  appeal,  and  guilt  (Section  58);  the
existential Interpretation of conscience and the way conscience is ordinarily
interpreted  (Section  59); 
the  authentic
potentiality-for-Being which is attested in the conscience (Section 60).
 

the  existential  structure  of 

itself  as  our  wanting 

in  accordance  with 

1.  ‘Der  Gewissensruf  hat  den  Charakter  des  Anrufs  des  Daseins  auf  sein  eigenstes
Selbstseinkönnen und das in der Weise des Aufrufs zum eigensten Schuldigsein.’ Our translation of
‘Anruf’ as ‘appeal’ and of ‘Aufruf’ as ‘summoning’ conceals the etymological connection of these
expressions  with  ‘Ruf’,  which  we  here  translate  as  ‘call’—a  word  which  we  have  already  used  in
translating  expressions  such  as  ‘nennen’,  ‘heissen’,  and  a  number  of  others.  The  verb  ‘anrufen’
(‘appeal’) means literally ‘to call to’; ‘einen auf etwas anrufen’ means ‘to call to someone and call
him to  something’.  Similarly  ‘aufrufen’  (‘summon’)  means  ‘to  call  up’;  ‘einen  zu  etwas  aufrufen’
means  ‘to  call  someone  up  to  something  which  he  is  to  do’,  in  the  sense  of  challenging  him  or
‘calling’ him to a higher level of performance.

2. ‘…das gesuchte existenzielle Wählen der Wahl eines Selbstseins, das wir, seiner existentialen
Struktur  entsprechend,  die  Entschlossenheit  nennen.’  While  our  version  preserves  the  grammatical
ambiguity of the German, it seems clear from H. 298 that the antecedent of the second relative clause
is ‘Selbstsein’ (‘a kind of Being-one’s-self’), not ‘Wählen’ (‘choosing’).

55. The Existential-ontological Foundations of Conscience

 

In 

the  phenomenon  of  conscience  we 

further
differentiation, that in some way it gives us something to understand. Our

find,  without 

analysis  of  it  takes  its  departure  from  this  finding.  Conscience  discloses,
and  thus  belongs  within  the  range  of  those  existential  phenomena  which
constitute the Being of the “there” as disclosedness.(iv) We have analysed
the most universal structures of state-of-mind, understanding, discourse and
falling. If we now bring conscience into this phenomenal context, this is not
a  matter  of  applying  these  structures  schematically  to  a  special  ‘case’  of
Dasein’s  disclosure.  On  the  contrary,  our  Interpretation  of  conscience  not
only  will  carry  further  our  earlier  analysis  of  the  disclosedness  of  the
“there”, but it will also grasp it more primordially with regard to Dasein’s
authentic Being.
 

iv. Cf. Section 28 ff., H. 130 ff.

H. 271

 

Through  disclosedness,  that  entity  which  we  call  “Dasein”  is  in  the
possibility  of  being  its  “there”.  With  its  world,  it  is  there  for  itself,  and
indeed—proximally  and  for  the  most  part—in  such  a  way  that  it  has
disclosed  to  itself  its  potentiality-for-Being  in  terms  of  the  ‘world’  of  its
concern. Dasein exists as a potentiality-for-Being which has, in each case,
already  abandoned  itself  to  definite  possibilities.(1)  And  it  has  abandoned
itself  to  these  possibilities  because  it  is  an  entity  which  has  been  thrown,
and  an  entity  whose  thrownness  gets  disclosed  more  or  less  plainly  and
impressively  by  its  having  a  mood.  To  any  state-of-mind  or  mood,
understanding belongs equiprimordially. In this way Dasein ‘knows’ what it
is itself capable of [woran es mit ihm selbst ist], inasmuch as it has either
projected itself upon possibilities of its own or has been so absorbed in the
“they”  that  it  has  let  such  possibilities  be  presented  to  it  by  the  way  in
which  the  “they”  has  publicly  interpreted  things.  The  presenting  of  these
possibilities,  however,  is  made  possible  existentially  through  the  fact  that
Dasein, as a Being-with which understands, can listen to Others.
 

1.  ‘Das  Seinkönnen,  als  welches  das  Dasein  existiert,  hat  sich  je  schon  bestimmten

Möglichkeiten überlassen.’

Losing itself in the publicness and the idle talk of the “they”, it fails to
hear [überhört] its own Self in listening to the they-self. If Dasein is to be
able  to  get  brought  back  from  this  lostness  of  failing  to  hear  itself,  and  if

this is to be done through itself, then it must first be able to find itself—to
find  itself  as  something  which  has  failed  to  hear  itself,  and  which  fails  to
hear  in  that  it  listens away  to  the  “they”.(1)  This  listening-away  must  get
broken off; in other words, the possibility of another kind of hearing which
will interrupt it, must be given by Dasein itself.(2) The possibility of its thus
getting  broken  off  lies  in  its  being  appealed  to  without  mediation.  Dasein
fails  to  hear  itself,  and  listens  away  to  the  “they”;  and  this  listening-away
gets broken by the call if that call, in accordance with its character as such,
arouses another kind of hearing, which, in relationship to the hearing that is
lost,(3) has a character in every way opposite. If in this lost hearing, one has
been fascinated with the ‘hubbub’ of the manifold ambiguity which idle talk
possesses  in  its  everyday  ‘newness’,  then  the  call  must  do  its  calling
without any hubbub and unambiguously, leaving no foothold for curiosity.
That  which,  by  calling  in  this  manner,  gives  us  to  understand,  is  the
conscience.
 

1. ‘…sich selbst, das sich überhört hat und überhört im Hinhören auf das Man.’ In this passage,
Heidegger has been exploiting three variations on the verb ‘hören’: ‘hören auf...’ (our ‘listen to...’),
‘überhören’  (‘fail  to  hear’),  and  ‘hinhören’  (‘listen  away’).  The  verb  ‘überhören’  has  two  quite
distinct  uses.  It  may  mean  the  ‘hearing’  which  a  teacher  does  when  he  ‘hears’  a  pupil  recite  his
lesson; but it may also mean to ‘fail to hear’, even to ‘ignore’ what one hears. This is the meaning
which Heidegger seems to have uppermost in mind; but perhaps he is also suggesting that when one
is  lost  in  the  “they”,  one  ‘hears’  one’s  own  Self  only  in  the  manner  of  a  perfunctory  teacher  who
‘hears’  a  recitation  without  ‘really  listening  to  it’.  In  ordinary  German  the  verb  ‘hinhören’  means
hardly more than to ‘listen’; but Heidegger is emphasizing the prefix ‘hin-’, which suggests that one
is listening to something other than oneself—listening away, in this case listening to the “they”. On
other verbs of hearing and listening, see Section 34 above, especially H. 163 ff.

2. ‘Dieses Hinhören muss gebrochen, das heisst es muss vom Dasein selbst die Möglichkeit eines

Hörens gegeben werden, das jenes unterbricht.’

3. ‘…zum verlorenen Hören...’ One might suspect that the ‘lost hearing’ is the hearing which one
‘loses’ by ‘failing to hear’; but Heidegger may mean rather the kind of hearing one does when one is
lost in the “they”—‘Überhören’ of one’s own Self and ‘Hinhören’ to the ‘they’.

We  take  calling  as  a  mode  of  discourse.  Discourse  articulates
intelligibility.  Characterizing  conscience  as  a  call  is  not  just  giving  a
‘picture’,  like  the  Kantian  representation  of  the  conscience  as  a  court  of
justice.  Vocal  utterance,  however,  is  not  essential  for  discourse,  and
therefore  not  for  the  call  either; this must not  be overlooked. Discourse is
already presupposed in any expressing or ‘proclaiming’ [“Ausrufen”]. If the
everyday  interpretation  knows  a  ‘voice’  of  conscience,  then  one  is  not  so
much  thinking  of  an  utterance  (for  this  is  something  which  factically  one

never  comes across);  the  ‘voice’ is  taken rather as a giving-to-understand.
In the tendency to disclosure which belongs to the call, lies the momentum
of a push—of an abrupt arousal. The call is from afar unto afar. It reaches
him who wants to be brought back.

But  by  this  characterization  of  the  conscience  we  have  only  traced  the
phenomenal horizon for analysing its existential structure. We are not  c o m
p a r i n g  this phenomenon with a call; we are  u n d e r s t a n d i n g  it as
a  kind  of  discourse—in  terms  of  the  disclosedness  that  is  constitutive  for
Dasein.  In  considering  this  we  have  from  the  beginning  avoided  the  first
route which offers itself for an Interpretation of conscience—that of tracing
it back to some psychical faculty such as understanding, will, or feeling, or
of explaining it as some sort  of mixture of these. When one is  confronted
with  such  a  phenomenon  as  conscience,  one  is  struck  by  the  ontologico-
anthropological  inadequacy  of  a  free-floating  framework  of  psychical
faculties or personal actions all duly classified.(vi)
 

v. Cf. Section H. 160 ff.
vi. Besides the Interpretations of conscience which we find in Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer, and
Nietzsche, one should notice M. Kähler’s Das  Gewissen, erster geschichtlicher Teil (1878)  and  his
article in the Realenzyklopädie für Protestantische Theologie end Kirche. See too A. Ritschl’s ‘Über
das  Gewissen’  (1876),  reprinted  in  his  Gesammelte  Aufsätze,  Neue  Folge  (1896),  pp.  177  ff.  See
finally  H.  G.  Stoker’s  monograph,  Das  Gewissen,  which  has  recently  appeared  in  Schriften  zur
Philosophie  und  Soziologie,  vol.  II  (1925),  under  the  editorship  of  Max  Scheler.  This  is  a  wide-
ranging  investigation;  it  brings  to  light  a  rich  multiplicity  of  conscience-phenomena,  characterizes
critically  the  different  possible  ways  of  treating  this  phenomenon  itself,  and  lists  some  further
literature,  though  as  regards  the  history  of  the  concept  of  conscience,  this  list  is  not  complete.
Stoker’s monograph differs from the existential Interpretation we have given above in its approach
and accordingly in its results as well, regardless of many points of agreement. Stoker underestimates
from the outset the hermeneutical conditions for a ‘description’ of ‘conscience as something which
subsists  Objectively  and  actually’  (p.  3).  This  leads  to  blurring  the  boundaries  between
phenomenology and theology, with damage to both. As regards the anthropological foundation of this
investigation, in which the personalism of Scheler has been taken over, cf. Section 10 of the present
treatise,  H.  47  ff.  All  the  same,  Stoker’s  monograph  signifies  notable  progress  as  compared  with
previous  Interpretations  of  conscience,  though  more  by  its  comprehensive  treatment  of  the
conscience-phenomena  and  their  ramifications  than  by  exhibiting  the  ontological  roots  of  the
phenomenon itself.

56. The Character of Conscience as a Call

 

 

H. 272

To any discourse there belongs that which is talked about in it. Discourse
gives  information  about  something,  and  does  so  in  some  definite  regard.
From  what  is  thus  talked  about,  it  draws  whatever  it  is  saying  as  this
particular  discourse—what  is  said  in  the  talk  as  such.  In  discourse  as
communication,  this  becomes  accessible  to  the  Dasein-with  of  Others,  for
the most part by way of uttering it in language.

In the call of conscience, what is it that is talked about—in other words,
to  what  is  the  appeal  made?  Manifestly  Dasein  itself.  This  answer  is  as
incontestable  as  it  is  indefinite.  If  the  call  has  so  vague  a  target,  then  it
might at most remain an occasion for Dasein to pay attention to itself. But it
is  essential  to  Dasein  that  along  with  the  disclosedness  of  its  world  it  has
been disclosed to itself, so that it always understands itself. The call reaches
Dasein  in  this  understanding  of  itself  which  it  always  has,  and  which  is
concernful in an everyday, average manner. The call reaches the they-self of
concernful Being with Others.

H. 273

 

And to what is one called when one is thus appealed to?(1) To one’s own
Self. Not to what Dasein counts for, can do, or concerns itself with in being
with one another publicly, nor to what it has taken hold of, set about, or let
itself be carried along with. The sort of Dasein which is understood after the
manner of the world both for Others and for itself, gets passed over in this
appeal; this is something of which the call to the Self takes not the slightest
cognizance. And because only the Self of the they-self gets appealed to and
brought to hear, the “they” collapses. But the fact that the call passes  over
both  the  “they”  and  the  manner  in  which  Dasein  has  been  publicly
interpreted,  does  not  by  any  means  signify  that  the  “they”  is  not  reached
too. Precisely in passing over the “they” (keen as it is for public repute) the
call pushes it into insignificance [Bedeutungslosigkeit]. But the Self, which
the  appeal  has  robbed  of  this  lodgement  and  hiding-place,  gets  brought  to
itself by the call.
 

1. ‘Und woraufhin wird es angerufen?’

When the they-self is appealed to, it gets called to the Self.(1) But it does
not get called to that Self which can become for itself an ‘object’ on which

to pass judgment, nor to that Self which inertly dissects its ‘inner life’ with
fussy  curiosity,  nor  to  that  Self  which  one  has  in  mind  when  one  gazes
‘analytically’ at psychical conditions and what lies behind them. The appeal
to  the  Self  in  the  they-self  does  not  force  it  inwards  upon  itself,  so  that  it
can  close  itself  off  from  the  ‘external  world’.  The  call  passes  over
everything  like  this  and  disperses  it,  so  as  to  appeal  solely  to  that  Self
which, notwithstanding, is in no other way than Being-in-the-world.

But how are we to determine what is said in the talk that belongs to this
kind  of  discourse?  What  does  the  conscience  call  to  him  to  whom  it
appeals?  Taken  strictly,  nothing.  The  call  asserts  nothing,  gives  no
information about world-events, has nothing to tell. Least of all does it try
to  set  going  a  ‘soliloquy’  in  the  Self  to  which  it  has  appealed.  ‘Nothing’
gets called to [zu-gerufen] this Self, but it has been summoned [aufgerufen]
to itself—that is, to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. The tendency of the
call is not such as to put up for ‘trial’ the Self to which the appeal is made;
but it calls Dasein forth (and ‘forward’) into its ownmost possibilities, as a
summons to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-Self.(2)

H. 274

 

The call dispenses with any kind of utterance. It does not put itself into
words  at  all;  yet  it  remains  nothing  less  than  obscure  and  indefinite.
Conscience discourses solely and constantly in the mode of keeping silent.
In this way it not only loses none of its perceptibility, but forces the Dasein
which has been appealed to and summoned, into the reticence of itself. The
fact that what is  called  in  the  call  has not  been formulated  in  words,  does
not  give  this  phenomenon  the  indefiniteness  of  a  mysterious  voice,  but
merely indicates that our understanding of what is ‘called’ is not to be tied
up with an expectation of anything like a communication.

Yet what the call discloses is unequivocal, even though it may undergo a
different interpretation in the individual Dasein in accordance with its own
possibilities  of  understanding.  While  the  content  of  the  call  is  seemingly
indefinite,  the direction  it takes  is  a  sure  one  and  is  not  to  be  overlooked.
The call does not require us to search gropingly for him to whom it appeals,
nor does it require any sign by which we can recognize that he is or is not
the one who is meant. When ‘delusions’ arise in the conscience, they do so
not because the call has committed some oversight (has miscalled),(3) but

only  because  the  call  gets  heard  in  such  a  way  that  instead  of  becoming
authentically understood, it gets drawn by the they-self into a soliloquy in
which  causes  get  pleaded,  and  it  becomes  perverted  in  its  tendency  to
disclose.
 

1. ‘Auf das Selbst wird das Man-selbst angerufen.’
2.  ‘Der  Ruf  stellt,  seiner  Ruftendenz  entsprechend,  das  angerufene  Selbst  nicht  zu  einer
“Verhandlung”,  sondern  als  Aufruf  zum  eigensten  Selbstseinkönnen  ist  er  ein  Vor-(nach-
“vorne”-)Rufen des Daseins in seine eigensten Möglichkeiten.’ The verbs ‘anrufen’, ‘aufrufen’, and
‘vorrufen’ can all be used in the legal sense of a ‘summons’.
3. ‘...ein Sichversehen (Sichver-rufen) des Rufes...’

One  must  keep  in  mind  that  when  we  designate  the  conscience  as  a
“call”, this call is an appeal to the they-self in its Self; as such an appeal, it
summons the Self to its potentiality-for-Being-its-Self and thus calls Dasein
forth to its possibilities.

But  we  shall  not  obtain  an  ontologically  adequate  Interpretation  of  the
conscience until it can be made plain not only who is called by the call but
also  who  does  the  calling,  how  the  one  to  whom  the  appeal  is  made  is
related  to  the  one  who  calls,  and  how  this  ‘relationship’  must  be  taken
ontologically as a way in which these are interconnected in their Being.

57. Conscience as the Call of Care

 

 

H. 275

Conscience summons Dasein’s Self from its lostness in the “they”. The
Self to which the appeal is made remains indefinite and empty in its “what”.
When Dasein interprets itself in terms of that with which it concerns itself,
the  call  passes  over  what  Dasein,  proximally  and  for  the  most  part,
understands  itself    a s.  And  yet  the  Self  has  been  reached,  unequivocally
and unmistakably. Not only is the call meant for him to whom the appeal is
made  ‘without  regard  for  persons’,  but  even  the  caller  maintains  itself  in
conspicuous  indefiniteness.  If  the  caller  is  asked  about  its  name,  status,
origin, or repute, it not only refuses to answer, but does not even leave the
slightest possibility of one’s making it into something with which one can
be familiar when one’s understanding of Dasein has a ‘worldly’ orientation.

On  the  other  hand,  it  by  no  means  disguises  itself  in  the  call.  That  which
calls  the  call,  simply  holds  itself  aloof  from  any  way  of  becoming  well-
known, and this belongs to its phenomenal character. To let itself be drawn
into getting considered and talked about, goes against its kind of Being.(1)
The  peculiar  indefiniteness  of  the  caller  and  the  impossibility  of  making
more definite what this caller is, are not just nothing; they are distinctive for
it  in  a  positive  way.  They  make  known  to  us  that  the  caller  is  solely
absorbed in summoning us to something, that it is heard only as such, and
furthermore  that  it  will  not  let  itself  be  coaxed.  But  if  so,  is  it  not  quite
appropriate  to  the  phenomenon  to  leave  unasked  the  question  of  what  the
caller  is?  Yes  indeed,  when  it  comes  to  listening  to  the  factical  call  of
conscience  in  an  existentiell  way,  but  not  when  it  comes  to  analysing
existentially the facticity of the calling and the existentiality of the hearing.
 

1. ‘Es geht wider die Art seines Seins, sich in ein Betrachten und Bereden ziehen zu lassen.’

But  is  it  at  all  necessary  to  keep  raising  explicitly  the  question  of  who
does  the  calling?  Is  this  not  answered  for  Dasein  just  as  unequivocally  as
the  question  of  to  whom  the  call  makes  its  appeal?  In  conscience  Dasein
calls itself. This understanding of the caller may be more or less awake in
the factical hearing of the call. Ontologically, however, it is not enough to
answer that Dasein is at the same time both the caller and the one to whom
the  appeal  is  made.  When  Dasein  is  appealed  to,  is  it  not  ‘there’  in  a
different  way  from  that  in  which  it  does  the  calling?  Shall  we  say  that  its
ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-Self functions as the caller?

Indeed  the  call  is  precisely something which we ourselves have neither
planned nor prepared for nor voluntarily performed, nor have we ever done
so. ‘It’ calls,(1) against our expectations and even against our will. On the
other hand, the call undoubtedly does not come from someone else who is
with me in the world. The call comes from me and yet from beyond me and
over me.(2)

These phenomenal findings are not to be explained away. After all, they
have been taken as a starting-point for explaining the voice of conscience as
an  alien  power  by  which  Dasein  is  dominated.  If  the  interpretation
continues  in  this  direction,  one  supplies  a  possessor  for  the  power  thus
posited,(3)  or  one  takes  the  power  itself  as  a  person  who  makes  himself
known—namely  God.  On  the  other  hand  one  may  try  to  reject  this

explanation in which the caller is taken as an alien manifestation of such a
power, and to explain away the conscience ‘biologically’ at the same time.
Both  these  explanations  pass  over  the  phenomenal  findings  too  hastily.
Such  procedures  are  facilitated  by  the  unexpressed  but  ontologically
dogmatic guiding thesis that what is (in other words, anything so factual as
the  call)  must  be  present-at-hand,  and  that  what  does  not  let  itself  be
Objectively demonstrated as present-at-hand, just is not at all.
 

1. ‘ “Es” ruft...’ Here the pronoun ‘es’ is used quite impersonally, and does not refer back to ‘the

call’ itself (‘Der Ruf’).

2. ‘Der Ruf kommt aus mir und doch über mich.’
3. ‘…unterlegt man der festgelegten Macht einen Besitzer…’

H. 276

 

But  methodologically  this  is  too  precipitate.  We  must  instead  hold  fast
not  only  to  the  phenomenal  finding  that  I  receive  the  call  as  coming  both
from  me  and  from  beyond  me,  but  also  to  the  implication  that  this
phenomenon  is  here  delineated  ontologically  as  a  phenomenon  of  Dasein.
Only  the  existential  constitution  of  this  entity  can  afford  us  a  clue  for
Interpreting the kind of Being of the ‘it’ which does the calling.

Does our previous analysis of Dasein’s state of Being show us a way of
making  ontologically  intelligible  the  kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to  the
caller, and, along with it, that which belongs to the calling? The fact that the
call  is  not  something  which  is  explicitly  performed  by me,  but  that  rather
‘it’ does the calling, does not justify seeking the caller in some entity with a
character  other  than  that  of  Dasein.  Yet  every  Dasein  always  exists
factically.  It  is  not  a  free-floating  self-projection;  but  its  character  is
determined  by  thrownness  as  a  Fact  of  the  entity  which  it  is;  and,  as  so
determined, it has in each case already been delivered over to existence, and
it constantly so remains. Dasein’s facticity,  however,  is  essentially distinct
from the factuality of something present-at-hand. Existent Dasein does not
encounter itself as something present-at-hand within-the-world. But neither
does thrownness adhere to Dasein as an inaccessible characteristic which is
of no importance for its existence. As something thrown, Dasein has been
thrown into existence. It exists as an entity which has to be as it is and as it
can be.

That it is factically, may be obscure and hidden as regards the “why” of
it; but the “that-it-is” has itself been disclosed to Dasein.(1) The thrownness
of  this  entity  belongs  to  the  disclosedness  of  the  ‘there’  and  reveals  itself
constantly  in  its  current  state-of-mind.  This  state-of-mind  brings  Dasein,
more or less explicitly and authentically, face to face with the fact ‘that it is,
and  that  it  has  to  be  something  with  a  potentiality-for-Being  as  the  entity
which  it  is’.(2)  For  the  most  part,  however,  its  mood  is  such  that  its
thrownness gets closed off. In the face of its thrownness Dasein flees to the
relief which comes with the supposed freedom of the they-self. This fleeing
has  been  described  as  a  fleeing  in  the  face  of  the  uncanniness  which  is
basically determinative for individualized Being-in-the-world. Uncanniness
reveals itself authentically in the basic state-of-mind of anxiety; and, as the
most  elemental  way  in  which  thrown  Dasein  is  disclosed,  it  puts  Dasein’s
Being-in-the-world face to face with the “nothing” of the world; in the face
of  this  “nothing”,  Dasein  is  anxious  with  anxiety  about  its  ownmost
potentiality-for-Being. What if this Dasein, which finds itself [sich befindet]
in  the  very  depths  of  its  uncanniness,  should  be  the  caller  of  the  call  of
conscience?

Nothing  speaks  against  this;  but  all  those  phenomena  which  we  have

hitherto set forth in characterizing the caller and its calling speak for it.
 

1. ‘Dass es faktisch ist, mag hinsichtlich des Warum verborgen sein, das ‘Dass’ selbst jedoch ist

dem Dasein erschlossen.’ (Cf. H. 135 above.)

2. ‘Diese bringt das Dasein mehr oder minder ausdrücklich und eigentlich vor sein “dass es ist

und als das Seiende, das es ist, seinkönnend zu sein hat”.’

H. 277

 

In its “who”, the caller is definable in a ‘worldly’ way by nothing at all.
The  caller  is  Dasein  in  its  uncanniness:  primordial,  thrown  Being-in-the-
world  as  the  “not-at-home”—the  bare  ‘that-it-is’  in  the  “nothing”  of  the
world. The caller is unfamiliar to the everyday they-self; it is something like
an alien voice. What could be more alien to the “they”, lost in the manifold
‘world’ of its concern, than the Self which has been individualized down to
itself  in  uncanniness  and  been  thrown  into  the  “nothing”?  ‘It’  calls,  even
though it gives the concernfully curious ear nothing to hear which might be
passed  along  in  further  retelling  and  talked  about  in  public.  But  what  is
Dasein even to report from the uncanniness of its thrown Being? What else

remains  for  it  than  its  own  potentiality-for-Being  as  revealed  in  anxiety?
How  else  is  “it”  to  call  than  by  summoning  Dasein  towards  this
potentiality-for-Being, which alone is the issue?

The  call  does  not  report  events;  it  calls  without  uttering  anything.  The
call discourses in the uncanny mode of keeping silent. And it does this only
because, in calling the one to whom the appeal is made, it does not call him
into the public idle talk of the “they”, but calls him back from this into the
reticence of his existent potentiality-for-Being. When the caller reaches him
to  whom  the  appeal  is  made,  it  does  so  with  a  cold  assurance  which  is
uncanny but by no means obvious. Wherein lies the basis for this assurance
if not in the fact that when Dasein has been individualized down to itself in
its uncanniness, it is for itself something that simply cannot be mistaken for
anything else? What is it that so radically deprives Dasein of the possibility
of misunderstanding itself by any sort of alibi and failing to recognize itself,
if  not  the  forsakenness  [Verlassenheit]  with  which  it  has  been  abandoned
[Überlassenheit] to itself?

Uncanniness is the basic kind of Being-in-the-world, even though in an
everyday  way  it  has  been  covered  up.  Out  of  the  depths  of  this  kind  of
Being, Dasein itself, as conscience, calls. The ‘it calls me’ [“es ruft mich”]
is a distinctive kind of discourse for Dasein. The call whose mood has been
attuned by anxiety is what makes it possible first and foremost for Dasein to
project  itself  upon  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.  The  call  of
conscience,  existentially  understood,  makes  known  for  the  first  time  what
we  have  hitherto  merely  contended:(vii)  that  uncanniness  pursues  Dasein
and is a threat to the lostness in which it has forgotten itself.
 

vii. Cf. Section 40, H. 189.

H. 278

 

The  proposition  that  Dasein  is  at  the  same  time  both  the  caller  and  the
one  to  whom  the  appeal  is  made,  has  now  lost  its  empty  formal  character
and  its  obviousness.  Conscience  manifests  itself  as  the  call  of  care:  the
caller  is  Dasein,  which,  in  its  thrownness  (in  its  Being-already-in),  is
anxious(1) about its potentiality-for-Being. The one to whom the appeal is
made is this very same Dasein, summoned to its ownmost potentiality-for-
Being (ahead of itself...). Dasein is falling into the “they” (in Being-already-

alongside the world of its concern), and it is summoned out of this falling
by  the  appeal.  The  call  of  conscience—that  is,  conscience  itself—has  its
ontological possibility in the fact that Dasein, in the very basis of its Being,
is care.
 

1.  ‘…sich  ängstigend...’  The  older  editions  have  ‘sich  ängstend’,  which  has  virtually  the  same

meaning, and is more characteristic of Heidegger’s style.

So  we  need  not  resort  to  powers  with  a  character  other  than  that  of
Dasein; indeed, recourse to these is so far from clarifying the uncanniness
of the call that instead it annihilates it. In the end, does not the reason why
‘explanations’ of the conscience have gone off the track, lie in the fact that
we have not looked long enough to establish our phenomenal findings as to
the  call,  and  that  Dasein  has  been  presupposed  as  having  some  kind  of
ontological  definiteness  or  indefiniteness,  whichever  it may  chance?  Why
should we look to alien powers for information before we have made sure
that  in  starting  our  analysis  we  have  not  given  too  low  an  assessment  of
Dasein’s Being, regarding it as an innocuous subject endowed with personal
consciousness, somehow or other occurring?

And yet, if the caller—who is ‘nobody’, when seen after the manner of
the  world—is  interpreted  as  a  power,  this  seems  to  be  a  dispassionate
recognition  of  something  that  one  can  ‘come  across  Objectively’.  When
seen  correctly,  however,  this  interpretation  is  only  a  fleeing  in  the  face  of
the conscience—a way for Dasein to escape by slinking away from that thin
wall by which the “they” is separated, as it were, from the uncanniness of
its  Being.  This  interpretation  of  the  conscience  passes  itself  off  as
recognizing the call in the sense of a voice which is ‘universally’ binding,
and  which  speaks  in  a  way  that  is  ‘not  just  subjective’.  Furthermore,  the
‘universal’ conscience becomes exalted to a ‘world-conscience’, which still
has the phenomenal character of an ‘it’ and  ‘nobody’,  yet  which  speaks—
there in the individual ‘subject’—as this indefinite something.

But  this  ‘public  conscience’—what  else  is  it  than  the  voice  of  the
“they”?  A  ‘world-conscience’  is  a  dubious  fabrication,  and  Dasein  can
come to this only because conscience, in its basis and its essence, is in each
case  mine—not  only  in  the  sense  that  in  each  case  the  appeal  is  to  one’s
ownmost potentiality-for-Being, but because the call comes from that entity
which in each case I myself am.

With this Interpretation of the caller, which is purely in accord with the
phenomenal  character  of  the  calling,  the  ‘power’  of  conscience  is  not
diminished and rendered ‘merely subjective’. On the contrary, only in this
way do the inexorability and unequivocal character of the call become free.
This Interpretation does justice to the ‘Objectivity’ of the appeal for the first
time by leaving it its ‘subjectivity’, which of course denies the they-self its
dominion.

H. 279

 

Nevertheless, this Interpretation of the conscience as the call of care will
be  countered  by  the  question  of  whether  any  interpretation  of  the
conscience can stand up if it removes itself so far from ‘natural experience’.
How  is  the  conscience  to  function  as  that  which  summons  us  to  our
ownmost  potentiality-for-Being,  when  proximally  and  for  the  most  part  it
merely warns and reproves? Does the conscience speak in so indefinite and
empty a manner about our potentiality-for-Being? Does it not  rather  speak
definitely  and  concretely  in  relation  to  failures  and  omissions  which  have
already befallen or which we still have before us? Does the alleged appeal
stem  from  a ‘bad’ conscience  or  from  a ‘good’ one?  Does  the  conscience
give us anything positive at all? Does it not function rather in just a critical
fashion?

Such  considerations  are  indisputably  within  their  rights.  We  can,
however,  demand  that  in  any  Interpretation  of  conscience  ‘one’  should
recognize  in  it  the  phenomenon  in  question  as  it  is  experienced  in  an
everyday manner. But satisfying this requirement does not mean in turn that
the ordinary ontical way of understanding conscience must be recognized as
the first court of appeal [erste Instanz] for an ontological Interpretation. On
the  other  hand,  the  considerations  which  we  have  just  marshalled  remain
premature as long as the analysis of conscience to which they pertain falls
short of its goal. Hitherto we have merely tried to trace back conscience as
a phenomenon of Dasein to the ontological constitution of that entity. This
has served to prepare us for the task of making the conscience intelligible as
an  attestation  of  Dasein’s  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being—an  attestation
which lies in Dasein itself.

But what the conscience attests becomes completely definite only when
we  have  delimited  plainly  enough  the  character  of  the  hearing  which

genuinely  corresponds  to  the  calling.  The  authentic  understanding  which
‘follows’  the  call  is  not  a  mere  addition  which  attaches  itself  to  the
phenomenon  of  conscience  by  a  process  which  may  or  may  not  be
forthcoming.  Only  from an  understanding  of  the  appeal  and  together  with
such  an  understanding  does  the  full Experience  of  conscience  let  itself  be
grasped. If in each case the caller and he to whom the appeal is made are at
the same time one’s own Dasein themselves, then in any failure to hear the
call or any incorrect hearing of oneself, there lies a definite kind of Dasein’s
Being.  A  free-floating  call  from  which  ‘nothing  ensues’  is  an  impossible
fiction when seen existentially. With regard to Dasein, ‘that nothing ensues’
signifies something positive.

H. 280

 

 

So then, only by analysing the way the appeal is understood can one be
led  to  discuss  explicitly  what  the  call  gives  one  to  understand.  But  only
with  our  foregoing  general  ontological  characterization  of  the  conscience
does  it  become  possible  to  conceive  existentially  the  conscience’s  call  of
‘Guilty!’(1) All experiences and interpretations of the conscience are at one
in that they make the ‘voice’ of conscience speak somehow of ‘guilt’.

58. Understanding the Appeal, and Guilt

To grasp phenomenally what one hears in understanding the appeal, we
must  go  back  to  the  appeal  anew.  The  appeal  to  the  they-self  signifies
summoning one’s ownmost Self to its potentiality-for-Being, and of course
as  Dasein—that  is,  as  concernful  Being-in-the-world  and  Being  with
Others.  Thus  in  Interpreting  existentially  that  towards  which  the  call
summons  us,  we  cannot  seek  to  delimit  any  concrete  single  possibility  of
existence  as 
the  methodological
possibilities and tasks which such an Interpretation implies. That which can
be established, and which seeks to be established, is not what gets called in
and  to  each  particular  Dasein  from  an  existentiell  standpoint,  but  is  rather
what belongs to  the existential  condition  for  the  possibility of  its  factical-
existentiell potentiality-for-Being.(2)

long  as  we  correctly  understand 

When  the  call  is  understood  with  an  existentiell  kind  of  hearing,  such
understanding is more authentic the more non-relationally Dasein hears and
understands its own Being-appealed-to, and the less the meaning of the call
gets perverted by what one says or by what is fitting and accepted [was sich
gehört und gilt]. But what is it that is essentially implied when the appeal is
understood  authentically?  What  is  it  that  has  been  essentially  given  us  to
understand  in  the  call  at  any  particular  time,  even  if  factically  it  has  not
always been understood?

We have already answered this question, however, in our thesis that the
call ‘says’ nothing which might be talked about, gives no information about
events.  The  call  points  forward  to  Dasein’s  potentiality-for-Being,  and  it
does  this  as  a  call  which  comes  from uncanniness.(3)  The  caller  is,  to  be
sure,  indefinite;  but  the  “whence”  from  which  it  calls  does  not  remain  a
matter  of  indifference  for  the  calling.  This  “whence”—the  uncanniness  of
thrown  individualization—gets  called  too  [mitgerufen]  in  the  calling;  that
is, it too gets disclosed [miterschlossen]. In calling forth to something, the
“whence” of the calling is the “whither” to which we are called back. When
the call gives us a potentiality-for-Being to understand, it does not give us
one  which  is  ideal  and  universal;  it  discloses  it  as  that  which  has  been
currently  individualized  and  which  belongs  to  that  particular  Dasein.  We
have  not  fully  determined  the  character  of  the  call  as  disclosure  until  we
understand it as one which calls us back in calling us forth [als vorrufender
Rückruf].  If  we  take  the  call  this  way  and  orient  ourselves  by  it,  we  must
first ask what it gives us to understand.
 

1.  ‘…das  im  Gewissen  gerufene  “schuldig”  existenzial  zu  begreifen.’  As  Heidegger  will  point
out,  the  words  ‘schuldig’,  ‘Schuld’  and  their  derivatives  have  many  different  meanings,
corresponding not only to ‘indebtedness’, as we have seen on H. 242 above, but also to ‘guilt’ and
‘responsibility’.  In  the  present  chapter  we  shall  translate  them  by  ‘guilty’  and  ‘guilt’  whenever
possible, even though these expressions will not always be entirely appropriate.

2.  ‘Nicht  das  je  existenziell  im  jeweiligen  Dasein  in  dieses  Gerufene  kann  und  will  fixiert
werden, sondern das, was zur existenzialen Bedingung der Möglichkeit des je faktischexistenziellen
Seinkönnens  gehört.’  In  the  older  editions  we  find  ‘an  dieses’  rather  than  ‘in  dieses’,  and  ‘zur’
appears in spaced type.

3. ‘Der Ruf weist das Dasein vor auf sein Seinkönnen und das als Ruf aus der Unheimlichkeit.’

H. 281

 

But  is  not  the  question  of  what  the  call  says  answered  more  easily  and
surely if we ‘simply’ allude to what we generally hear or fail to hear in any

experience  of  conscience:  namely,  that  the  call  either  addresses  Dasein  as
‘Guilty!’, or, as in the case when the conscience gives warning, refers to a
possible ‘Guilty!’, or affirms, as a ‘good’ conscience, that one is ‘conscious
of  no  guilt’?  Whatever  the  ways  in  which  conscience  is  experienced  or
interpreted, all our experiences ‘agree’ on this ‘Guilty!’. If only it were not
defined  in  such  wholly  different  ways!  And  even  if  the  meaning  of  this
‘Guilty!’ should let itself be taken in a way upon which everyone is agreed,
the existential  conception of  this  Being-guilty  would  still  remain  obscure.
Yet if Dasein addresses itself as ‘Guilty!’, whence could it draw its idea of
guilt  except  from  the  Interpretation  of  its  own  Being?  All  the  same,  the
question  arises  anew:  who  says  how  we  are  guilty  and  what  “guilt”
signifies? On  the  other  hand,  the  idea  of  guilt  is  not  one  which  could  be
thought up arbitrarily and forced upon Dasein. If any understanding of the
essence  of  guilt  is  possible  at  all,  then  this  possibility  must  have  been
sketched out in Dasein beforehand. How are we to find the trail which can
lead  to  revealing  this  phenomenon?  All  ontological  investigations  of  such
phenomena  as  guilt,  conscience,  and  death,  must  start  with  what  the
everyday  interpretation  of  Dasein  ‘says’  about  them.  Because  Dasein  has
falling as its kind of Being, the way Dasein gets interpreted is for the most
part  inauthentically  ‘oriented’  and  does  not  reach  the  ‘essence’;  for  to
Dasein  the  primordially  appropriate  ontological  way  of  formulating
questions  remains  alien.  But  whenever  we  see  something  wrongly,  some
injunction as to the primordial ‘idea’ of the phenomenon is revealed along
with  it.  Where,  however,  shall  we  get  our  criterion  for  the  primordial
existential meaning of the ‘Guilty!’? From the fact that this ‘Guilty!’ turns
up  as  a  predicate  for  the  ‘I  am’.  Is  it  possible  that  what  is  understood  as
‘guilt’ in our inauthentic interpretation lies in Dasein’s Being as such, and
that it does so in such a way that so far as any Dasein factically exists, it is
also guilty?

Thus by invoking the ‘Guilty!’ which everyone agrees that he hears, one
has  not  yet  answered  the  question  of  the  existential  meaning  of  what  has
been called in the call. What has been called must first be conceptualized if
we are to understand what the call of ‘Guilty!’ means, and why and how it
becomes  perverted  in  its  signification  by  the  everyday  way  of  interpreting
it.

H. 282

 

Everyday  common  sense  first  takes  ‘Being-guilty’  in  the  sense  of
‘owing’,  of  ‘having  something  due  on  account’.(1)  One  is  to  give  back  to
the Other something to which the latter has a claim. This ‘Being-guilty’ as
‘having  debts’  [“Schulden  haben”]  is  a  way  of  Being  with  Others  in  the
field  of  concern,  as  in  providing  something  or  bringing  it  along.  Other
modes  of  such  concern  are:  depriving,  borrowing,  withholding,  taking,
stealing—failing to satisfy, in some way or other, the claims which Others
have  made  as  to  their  possessions.  This  kind  of  Being-guilty  is  related  to
that with which one can concern oneself.

“Being-guilty”  also  has  the  signification  of  ‘being  responsible  for’
[“schuld sein an”]—that is, being the cause or author of something, or even
‘being the occasion’ for something. In this sense of ‘having responsibility’
for something, one can ‘be guilty’ of something without ‘owing’ anything
to someone else or coming to ‘owe’ him. On the other hand, one can owe
something  to  another  without  being  responsible  for  it  oneself.  Another
person can ‘incur debts’ with Others ‘for me’.(2)

These  ordinary  significations  of  “Being-guilty”  as  ‘having  debts  to
someone’  and  ‘having  responsibility  for  something’  can  go  together  and
define a kind of behaviour which we call ‘making oneself responsible’; that
is, by having the responsibility for having a debt, one may break a law and
make oneself punishable.(3) Yet the requirement which one fails to satisfy
need not necessarily be related to anyone’s possessions; it can regulate the
very  manner  in  which  we  are  with  one  other  publicly.  ‘Making  oneself
responsible’ by breaking a law, as we have thus defined it, can indeed also
have the character of ‘coming to owe something to Others’.(4)
 

1. ‘Die alltägliche Verständigkeit nimmt das “Schuldigsein” zunächst im Sinne von “schulden”,
“bei  einem  etwas  an  Brett  haben”.’  While  this  represents  a  very  familiar  usage  of  the  German
‘Schuldigsein’, it of course does not represent a ‘common-sense’ usage of the English ‘Being-guilty’,
which comes from an entirely different stem.

2.  ‘Im  Sinne  dieses  “Schuld  habens”  an  etwas  kann  man  “schuldig  sein”,  ohne  einem  Andern
etwas  zu  “schulden”  oder  “schuldig”  zu  werden.  Umgekehrt  kann  man  einem  Andern  etwas
schulden,  ohne  selbst  schuld  daran  zu  sein.  Ein  Anderer  kann  bei  Anderen  “für  mich”  “Schulden
machen”.’ On ‘ “schuldig” zu werden’, Cf. our note 1, H. 287 below.

3.  ‘...das  wir  nennen  “sich  schuldig  machen”,  das  heisst  durch  das  Schuldhaben  an  einem

Schuldenhaben ein Recht verletzen und sich strafbar machen.’

4. ‘…eines “Schuldigwerdens an Anderen”.’

This  does  not  happen  merely  through  law-breaking  as  such,  but  rather
through my having the responsibility for the Other’s becoming endangered
in  his  existence,  led  astray,  or  even  ruined.  This  way  of  coming  to  owe
something to Others is possible without breaking the ‘public’ law. Thus the
formal  conception  of  “Being-guilty”  in  the  sense  of  having  come  to  owe
something  to  an  Other,  may  be  defined  as  follows:  “Being-the-basis for  a
lack of something in the Dasein of an Other, and in such a manner that this
very Being-the-basis determines itself as ‘lacking in some way’ in terms of
that for which it is the basis.”(1) This kind of lacking is a failure to satisfy
some requirement which applies to one’s existent Being with Others.

H. 283

 

the  contrary, 

We need not consider how such requirements arise and in what way their
character  as  requirements  and  laws  must  be  conceived  by  reason  of  their
having  such  a  source.  In  any  case,  “Being-guilty”  in  the  sense  last
mentioned,  the  breach  of  a  ‘moral  requirement’,  is  a  kind  of  Being  which
belongs  to  Dasein.  Of  course  this  holds  good  also  for  “Being-guilty”  as
‘making  oneself  punishable’  and  as  ‘having  debts’,  and  for  any  ‘having
responsibility  for...’.  These  too  are  ways  in  which  Dasein  behaves.  If  one
takes  ‘laden  with  moral  guilt’  as  a  ‘quality’  of  Dasein,  one  has  said  very
little.  On 
that  such  a
this  only  makes 
characterization  does  not  suffice  for  distinguishing  ontologically  between
this  kind  of  ‘attribute  of  Being’  for  Dasein  and  those  other  ways  of
behaving which we have just listed. After all, the concept of moral guilt has
been  so  little  clarified  ontologically  that  when  the  idea  of  deserving
punishment, or even of having debts to someone, has also been included in
this concept, or when these ideas have been employed in the very defining
of it, such interpretations of this phenomenon could become prevalent and
have  remained  so.  But  therewith  the  ‘Guilty!’  gets  thrust  aside  into  the
domain of concern in the sense of reckoning up claims and balancing them
off.

it  manifest 

The  phenomenon  of  guilt,  which  is  not  necessarily  related  to  ‘having
debts’ and law-breaking, can be clarified only if we first inquire in principle
into  Dasein’s  Being-guilty—in  other  words,  if  we  conceive  the  idea  of
‘Guilty!’ in terms of Dasein’s kind of Being.

If this is our goal, the idea of ‘Guilty!’ must be sufficiently formalized so
that  those  ordinary  phenomena  of  “guilt”  which  are  related  to  our
concernful Being with Others, will drop out. The idea of guilt must not only
be raised above the domain of that concern in which we reckon things up,
but it must also be detached from relationship to any law or “ought” such
that by failing to comply with it one loads himself with guilt. For here too
“guilt” is still necessarily defined as a lack—when something which ought
to be and which can be is missing.(2) To be missing, however, means not-
the  not-Being-present-at-hand  of
Being-present-at-hand.  A 
something which ought to be, is a definite sort of Being which goes with the
present-at-hand.  In  this  sense  it  is  essential  that  in  existence  there  can  be
nothing  lacking,  not  because  it  would  then  be  perfect,  but  because  its
character of Being remains distinct from any presence-at-hand.
 

lack,  as 

1. ‘...Grundsein für einen Mangel im Dasein eines Andern, so zwar, dass dieses Grundsein selbst

sich aus seinem Wofür als “mangelhaft” bestimmt.’

2. ‘...auf ein Sollen und Gesetz, wogegen sich verfehlend jemand Schuld auf sich lädt. Denn auch
hier wird die Schuld notwendig noch als Mangel bestimmt, als Fehlen von etwas, was sein soll und
kann.’

H. 284

 

Nevertheless, in the idea of ‘Guilty!’ there lies the character of the “not”.
If the ‘Guilty!’ is something that can definitely apply to existence, then this
raises  the  ontological  problem  of  clarifying  existentially  the  character  of
this  “not”  as  a  “not”. Moreover,  to  the  idea  of  ‘Guilty!’  belongs  what  is
expressed  without  further  differentiation  in  the  conception  of  guilt  as
‘having  responsibility  for’—that  is,  as  Being-the  basis  for...  Hence  we
define the formally existential idea of the ‘Guilty!’ as “Being-the-basis for a
Being  which  has  been  defined  by  a  ‘not’  ”—that  is  to  say,  as  “Being-the-
basis  of  a  nullity”.(1)  The  idea  of  the  “not”  which  lies  in  the  concept  of
guilt  as  understood  existentially,  excludes  relatedness  to  anything  present-
at-hand  which  is  possible  or  which  may  have  been  required;  furthermore,
Dasein  is  altogether  incommensurable  with  anything  present-at-hand  or
generally accepted [Geltenden] which is not it itself, or which is not in the
way  Dasein  is—namely,  existing;  so  any  possibility  that,  with  regard  to
Being-the-basis  for  a lack, the  entity  which is  itself such a basis might  be
reckoned up as ‘lacking in some manner’, is a possibility which drops out.

If a lack, such as failure to fulfil some requirement, has been ‘caused’ in a
manner  characteristic  of  Dasein,  we  cannot  simply  reckon  back  to  there
being something lacking [Mangelhaftigkeit] in the ‘cause’. Being-the-basis-
for-something  need  not  have  the  same  “not”-character  as  the  privativum
which is based upon it and which arises from it. The basis need not acquire
a nullity of its own from that for which it is the basis [seinem Begründeten].
This  implies,  however,  that  Being-guilty  does  not  first  result  from  an
indebtedness  [Verschuldung],  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  indebtedness
becomes  possible  only  ‘on  the  basis’  of  a  primordial  Being-guilty.  Can
something  like  this  be  exhibited  in  Dasein’s  Being,  and  how  is  it  at  all
possible existentially?
 

1.  ‘…Grundsein  für  ein  durch  ein  Nicht  bestimmtes  Sein—das  heisst  Grundsein  einer
Nichtigkeit’. The noun ‘Nichtigkeit’ which might well be translated here as ‘notness’, may be used in
legal contexts where something has been declared ‘null and void’, and can be used more generally to
apply to almost anything that is vacuous, trifling, ephemeral, or ‘nil’. Heidegger will rule out some of
these connotations on H. 285.

Dasein’s  Being  is  care.  It  comprises  in  itself  facticity  (thrownness),
existence (projection),  and falling. As  being,  Dasein is  something that has
been thrown; it has been brought into its “there”, but not of its own accord.
As  being,  it  has  taken  the  definite  form  of  a  potentiality-for-Being  which
has  heard  itself  and  has  devoted  itself  to  itself,  but  not  as  itself.(1)  As
existent,  it  never  comes  back  behind  its  thrownness  in  such  a  way  that  it
might first release this ‘that-it-is-and-has-to-be’ from its Being-its-Self  and
lead it into the “there”. Thrownness, however, does not lie behind it as some
event  which  has  happened  to  Dasein,  which  has  factually  befallen  and
fallen  loose  from  Dasein  again;(2)  on  the  contrary,  as  long  as  Dasein  is,
Dasein,  as  care,  is  constantly  its  ‘that-it-is’.  To  this  entity  it  has  been
delivered over, and as such it can exist solely as the entity which it is; and
as this entity to which it has been thus delivered over, it is,  in  its existing,
the  basis  of  its  potentiality-for-Being.  Although  it  has  not  laid  that  basis
itself, it reposes in the weight of it, which is made manifest to it as a burden
by Dasein’s mood.

And how is Dasein this thrown basis? Only in that it projects itself upon
possibilities into which it has been thrown. The Self, which as such has to
lay  the  basis for  itself, can never get  that  basis  into  its  power;  and  yet,  as

existing, it must take over Being-a-basis. To be its own thrown basis is that
potentiality-for-Being which is the issue for care.

H. 285

 

In being a basis—that is, in existing as thrown—Dasein constantly lags
behind its possibilities. It is never existent before its basis, but only from it
and as this  basis.  Thus  “Being-a-basis”  means  never  to  have  power  over
one’s  ownmost  Being  from  the  ground  up.  This  “not”  belongs  to  the
existential meaning of “thrownness”. It itself, being a basis, is  a nullity  of
itself.(3) “Nullity” does not signify anything like not-Being-present-at-hand
or  not-subsisting;  what  one  has  in  view  here  is  rather  a  “not”  which  is
constitutive for this Being of Dasein—its thrownness. The character of this
“not” as a “not” may be defined existentially: in being its Self, Dasein is, as
a Self, the entity that has been thrown. It has been released from its basis,
not through itself but to itself; so as to be as this basis. Dasein is not itself
the  basis  of  its  Being,  inasmuch  as  this  basis  first  arises  from  its  own
projection; rather, as Being-its-Self, it is the Being of its basis.(4) This basis
is never anything but the basis for an entity whose Being has to take over
Being-a-basis.
 

1. ‘Seiend ist es als Seinkönnen bestimmt, das sich selbst gehört und doch nicht als es selbst sich
zu eigen gegeben hat.’ It is perhaps tempting to interpret ‘gehört’ as coming from the verb ‘gehören’
(‘belong’)  rather  than ‘hören’ (‘hear’);  we could then read  ‘belongs  to itself’rather  than ‘has heard
itself’. Our version, however, seems to be favoured by the grammar of this passage.

2. ‘Die Geworfenheit aber liegt nicht hinter ihm als ein tatsächlich vorgefallenes und vom Dasein

wieder losgefallenes Ereignis, das mit ihm geschah…’

3.  ‘Es  ist  nie  existent  vor  seinem  Grunde,  sondern  je  nur  aus  ihm  und  als  dieser.  Grundsein
besagt  demnach,  des  eigensten  Seins  von  Grund  auf  nie  mächtig  sein.  Dieses  Nicht  gehört  zum
existenzialen  Sinn  der  Geworfenheit.  Grund-seiend  ist  es  selbst  eine  Nichtigkeit  seiner  selbst.’
Presumably the ‘not’ to which Heidegger refers in this puzzling passage, is implied in the ‘never’ of
the preceding sentence.

4.  ‘…Selbst  seiend  ist  das  Dasein  das  geworfene  Seiende  als  Selbst.  Nicht  durch  es  selbst,
sondern an es selbst entlassen aus dem Grunde, um als dieser zu sein. Das Dasein ist nicht insofern
selbst  der  Grund  seines  Seins,  als  dieser  aus  eigenem  Entwurf  erst  entspringt,  wohl  aber  ist  es  als
Selbstsein das Sein des Grundes.’

Dasein  is  its  basis  existently—that  is,  in  such  a  manner  that  it
understands itself in terms of possibilities, and, as so understanding itself, is
that  entity  which  has  been  thrown.  But  this  implies  that  in  having  a
potentiality-for-Being  it  always  stands  in  one  possibility  or  another:  it

constantly is not other possibilities, and it has waived these in its existentiell
projection.  Not  only  is  the  projection,  as  one  that  has  been  thrown,
determined  by  the  nullity  of  Being-a-basis;  as  projection  it  is  itself
essentially  null.  This  does  not  mean  that  it  has  the  ontical  property  of
‘inconsequentiality’  or  ‘worthlessness’;  what  we  have  here  is  rather
something  existentially  constitutive  for  the  structure  of  the  Being  of
projection. The nullity we have in mind belongs to Dasein’s Being-free for
its existentiell possibilities. Freedom, however, is only in the choice of  o n
e  possibility—that is, in tolerating one’s not having chosen the others and
one’s not being able to choose them.

In  the  structure  of  thrownness,  as  in  that  of  projection,  there  lies
essentially  a  nullity.  This  nullity  is  the  basis  for  the  possibility  of
inauthentic  Dasein  in  its  falling;  and  as  falling,  every  inauthentic  Dasein
factically  is.  Care  itself,  in  its  very  essence,  is  permeated  with  nullity
through  and  through.  Thus  “care”—Dasein’s  Being—means,  as  thrown
projection,  Being-the-basis  of  a  nullity  (and  this  Being-the-basis  is  itself
null).  This  means that Dasein  as  such  is  guilty,  if  our  formally  existential
definition of “guilt” as “Being-the-basis of a nullity” is indeed correct.

Existential  nullity  has  by  no  means  the  character  of  a  privation,  where
something is lacking in comparison with an ideal which has been set up but
does  not  get  attained  in  Dasein;  rather,  the  Being  of  this  entity  is  already
null as projection; and it is null in advance of [vor] any of the things which
it can project and which it mostly attains.(1) This nullity, moreover, is thus
not something which emerges in Dasein occasionally, attaching itself to it as
an  obscure  quality  which  Dasein  might  eliminate  if  it  made  sufficient
progress.
 

1. The negative character to which Heidegger here calls attention is not brought out as clearly by
the  word  ‘projection’  (etymologically,  ‘throwing  forward’)  as  it  is  by  the  German  ‘entwerfen’
(‘throwing off’ or ‘throwing away’), where the prefix ‘ent-’ indicates separation.

H. 286

 

In spite of this, the ontological meaning of the notness [Nichtheit] of this
existential  nullity  is  still  obscure.  But  this  holds  also  for  the  ontological
essence  of  the  “not”  in  general.  Ontology  and  logic,  to  be  sure,  have
exacted  a  great  deal  from  the  “not”,  and  have  thus  made  its  possibilities
visible  in  a  piecemeal  fashion;  but  it  itself  has  not  been  unveiled

ontologically. Ontology came across the “not” and made use of it. But is it
so obvious  that every  “not”  signifies  something negative  in  the  sense  of a
lack? Is its positivity exhausted by the fact that it constitutes ‘passing over’
something? Why does all dialectic take refuge in negation, though it cannot
provide dialectical grounds for this sort of thing itself, or even just establish
it as a problem? Has anyone ever made a problem of the ontological source
of notness, or, prior to that, even sought the mere conditions on the basis of
which  the  problem  of  the  “not”  and  its  notness  and  the  possibility  of  that
notness can be raised? And how else are these conditions to be found except
by taking the meaning of Being in general as a theme and clarifying it?

The  concepts  of  privation  and  lack—which,  moreover,  are  not  very
transparent—are already insufficient for the ontological Interpretation of the
phenomenon of guilt, though if we take them formally enough, we can put
them  to  considerable  use.  Least  of  all  can  we  come  any  closer  to  the
existential phenomenon of guilt by taking our orientation from the idea of
evil, the malum as privatio boni. Just as the  b o n u m  and its privatio have
the  same  ontological  origin  in  the  ontology  of  the  present-at-hand,  this
ontology  also  applies  to  the  idea  of  ‘value’,  which  has  been  ‘abstracted’
from these.

Not only can entities whose Being is care load themselves with factical
guilt,  but  they are guilty  in  the  very  basis  of  their  Being;  and  this  Being-
guilty  is  what  provides,  above  all,  the  ontological  condition  for  Dasein’s
ability  to  come  to    o  w  e    anything  in  factically  existing.  This  essential
the
Being-guilty 
possibility of the ‘morally’ good and for that of the ‘morally’ evil—that is,
for  morality  in  general  and  for  the  possible  forms  which  this  may  take
factically.  The  primordial  “Being-guilty”  cannot  be  defined  by  morality,
since morality already presupposes it for itself.

the  existential  condition  for 

is,  equiprimordially, 

But  what  kind  of  experience  speaks  for  this  primordial  Being-guilty
which belongs to Dasein? Nor may we forget the counter-question: ‘is’ guilt
‘there’  only  if  a  consciousness  of  guilt  gets  awakened,  or  does  not  the
primordial  Being-guilty(1)  make  itself  known  rather  in  the  very  fact  that
guilt is ‘asleep’? That this primordial Being-guilty remains proximally and
for the most part undisclosed, that it is kept closed off by Dasein’s falling
Being,  reveals  only  the  aforesaid  nullity.  Being-guilty  is  more  primordial
than any knowledge about it. And only because Dasein is guilty in the basis
of  its  Being,  and  closes  itself  off  from  itself  as  something  thrown  and

falling, is conscience possible, if indeed the call gives us this Being-guilty
as something which at bottom we are to understand.
 

1. ‘Schuldigsein’. In the earlier editions the ‘sein’ is emphasized by having the type spaced out.

H. 287

 

The call is the call of care. Being-guilty constitutes the Being to which
we  give  the  name  of  “care”.  In  uncanniness  Dasein  stands  together  with
itself  primordially.  Uncanniness  brings  this  entity  face  to  face  with  its
undisguised  nullity,  which  belongs  to  the  possibility  of  its  ownmost
potentiality-for-Being. To the extent that for Dasein, as care, its Being is an
issue, it summons itself as a “they” which is factically falling, and summons
itself from its uncanniness towards its potentiality-for-Being.(1) The appeal
calls  back  by  calling  forth:(2)  it  calls  Dasein  forth  to  the  possibility  of
taking over, in existing, even that thrown entity which it is; it calls Dasein
back to its thrownness so as to understand this thrownness as the null basis
which  it  has  to  take  up  into  existence.  This  calling-back  in  which
conscience  calls  forth,  gives  Dasein  to  understand  that  Dasein  itself—the
null basis for its null projection, standing in the possibility of its Being—is
to bring itself back to itself from its lostness in the “they”; and this means
that it is guilty.

But in that case the sort of thing which Dasein gives itself to understand
would  be  information  about  itself.  And  the  hearing  which  corresponds  to
such a call would be a taking cognizance of the Fact that one is ‘guilty’. If,
however, the call is to have the character of a summons, does not this way
of interpreting the conscience lead to a complete perversion of its function?
Does not a “summons to Being-guilty” mean a summons to evil?

One would not want to impose upon the conscience such a meaning for
the “call”, even in the most violent of Interpretations. But if not, what does
it mean to ‘summon one to Being-guilty’?

The meaning of the “call” becomes plain if, in our understanding of it,
we stick to the existential sense of “Being-guilty”, instead of making basic
the derivative conception of guilt in the sense of an indebtedness which has
‘arisen’  through  some  deed  done  or  left  undone.  Such  a  demand  is  not
arbitrary,  if  the  call  of  conscience,  coming  from  Dasein  itself,  is  directed
towards that entity alone. But if so, the “summons to Being-guilty” signifies

a calling-forth to that potentiality-for-Being which in each case I as Dasein
am  already.  Dasein  need  not  first  load  a  ‘guilt’  upon  itself  through  its
failures or omissions; it must only be ‘guilty’ authentically—‘guilty’ in the
way in which it is.(3)
 

1.  We  follow  the  newer  editions  in  reading:  ‘...ruft  es  aus  der  Unheimlichkeit  sich  selbst  als
faktisch-verfallendes  Man  auf  zu  seinem  Seinkönnen.’  This  is  apparently  a  correction  of  the  older
version, where one finds ‘Man selbst’ instead of ‘Man’, and might be tempted to construe this as a
misprint for ‘Man-selbst’ (‘they-self’).

2. ‘Der Anruf in vorrufender Rückruf.’
3. ‘...es soll nur das “schuldig”—als welches es ist—eigentlith sein.’

thus 

Hearing 

tantamount 

the  appeal  correctly 

to  having  an
is 
understanding of oneself in one’s ownmost potentiality-for-Being—that is,
to  projecting  oneself  upon  one’s  ownmost  authentic  potentiality  for
becoming guilty.(1) When Dasein understandingly lets itself be called forth
to this possibility, this includes its becoming free for the call—its readiness
for the potentiality of getting appealed to. In understanding the call, Dasein
is  in  thrall  to  [hörig]  its  ownmost  possibility  of  existence.  It  has  chosen
itself.
 

1. ‘Schuldigwerdenkönnen’. This ‘ownmost authentic’ sense of ‘schuldig werden’ is presumably
to be contrasted with the sense to which we have called attention in notes 2 and 4, H. 282 above, and
which we have expressed by the phrase ‘come to owe’. When it seems to us that Heidegger has the
authentic  sense  in  mind,  we  shall  express  it  by  the  phrase  ‘become  guilty’,  though  this  device
exaggerates a contrast which would not be felt so sharply by the German reader.

H. 288

 

In so choosing, Dasein makes possible its ownmost Being-guilty, which
remains  closed  off  from  the  they-self.  The  common  sense  of  the  “they”
knows  only  the  satisfying  of  manipulable  rules  and  public  norms  and  the
failure to satisfy them. It reckons up infractions of them and tries to balance
them off. It has slunk away from its ownmost Being-guilty so as to be able
to  talk more loudly about  making “mistakes”.  But in  the  appeal, the  they-
self  gets  called  to  [angerufen]  the  ownmost  Being-guilty  of  the  Self.
Understanding the call is choosing; but it is not a choosing of conscience,
which as such cannot be chosen. What is chosen is having-a-conscience as
Being-free  for  one’s  ownmost  Being-guilty.  “Understanding  the  appeal”
means “wanting to have a conscience”.

This does not mean that one wants to have a ‘good conscience’, still less
that one cultivates the call voluntarily; it means solely that one is ready to
be appealed to. Wanting to have a conscience is just as far from seeking out
one’s  factical  indebtednesses  as  it  is  from  the  tendency  to  liberation  from
guilt in the sense of the essential ‘guilty’.

Wanting  to  have  a  conscience  is  rather  the  most  primordial  existentiell
presupposition for the possibility of factically coming to owe something. In
understanding the call, Dasein lets its ownmost Self take action in itself [in
sich handeln] in  terms  of  that  potentiality-for-Being  which  it  has  chosen.
Only  so  can  it  be  answerable  [verantwortlich].  Factically,  however,  any
taking-action is necessarily ‘conscienceless’, not only because it may fail to
avoid some factical moral indebtedness, but because, on the null basis of its
null projection, it has, in Being with Others, already become guilty towards
them. Thus one’s wanting-to-have-a-conscience becomes the taking-over of
that  essential  consciencelessness  within  which  alone  the  existentiell
possibility of being ‘good’ subsists.

Though  the  call  gives  no  information,  it  is  not  merely  critical;  it  is
positive, in that it discloses Dasein’s most primordial potentiality-for-Being
as  Being-guilty.  Thus  conscience  manifests  itself  as  an  attestation  which
belongs to Dasein’s Being—an attestation in which conscience calls Dasein
itself  face  to  face  with  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.  Is  there  an
existentially  more  concrete  way  of  determining  the  character  of  the
authentic potentiality-for-Being which has thus been attested? But now that
we have exhibited a potentiality-for-Being which is attested in Dasein itself,
a preliminary question arises: can we claim sufficient evidential weight for
the  way  we  have  exhibited  this,  as  long  as  the  embarrassment  of  our
Interpreting  the  conscience  in  a  one-sided  manner  by  tracing  it  back  to
Dasein’s constitution while hastily passing over all the familiar findings of
the ordinary interpretation of conscience, is one that is still undiminished?
Is, then, the phenomenon of conscience, as it ‘actually’ is, still recognizable
at all in the Interpretation we have given? Have we not been all too sure of
ourselves in the ingenuousness with which we have deduced an idea of the
conscience from Dasien’s state of Being?

H. 289

 

The  final  step  of  our  Interpretation  of  the  conscience  is  the  existential
delimitation  of  the  authentic  potentiality-for-Being  which  conscience
attests.  If  we  are  to  assure  ourselves  of  a  way  of  access  which  will  make
such a step possible even for the ordinary understanding of the conscience,
we  must  explicitly  demonstrate  the  connection  between  the  results  of  our
ontological  analysis  and  the  everyday  ways  in  which  the  conscience  is
experienced.

59.  The  Existential  Interpretation  of  the  Conscience,  and  the  Way

Conscience is Ordinarily Interpreted
 

1. ‘Die existenziale Interpretation des Gewissens und die vulgäre Gewissensauslegung’.

Conscience  is  the  call  of  care  from  the  uncanniness  of  Being-in-the-
world—the  call  which  summons  Dasein  to  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-
Being-guilty. And corresponding to this call, wanting-to-have-a-conscience
has  emerged  as  the  way  in  which  the  appeal  is  understood.  These  two
definitions  cannot  be  brought  into  harmony  at  once  with  the  ordinary
interpretation of conscience. Indeed they seem to be in direct conflict with
it.  We  call  this  interpretation  of  conscience  the  “ordinary”  one  [Vulgär]
because in characterizing this phenomenon and describing its ‘function’, it
sticks to what “they” know as the conscience, and how “they” follow it or
fail to follow it.

But  must  the  ontological  Interpretation  agree  with  the  ordinary
interpretation  at  all?  Should  not  the  latter  be,  in  principle,  ontologically
suspect?  If  indeed  Dasein  understands  itself  proximally  and  for  the  most
part in terms of that with which it concerns itself, and if it interprets all its
ways of behaving as concern, then will not there be falling and concealment
in its interpretation of that very way of its Being which, as a call, seeks to
bring  it  back  from  its  lostness  in  the  concerns  of  the  “they”?(2)
Everydayness  takes  Dasein  as  something  ready-to-hand  to  be  concerned
with—that  is,  something  that  gets  managed  and  reckoned  up.  ‘Life’  is  a
‘business’, whether or not it covers its costs.
 

2. ‘…wird es dann nicht gerade die Weise seines Seins verfallend-verdeckend auslegen, die es als
Ruf  aus  der  Verlorenheit  in  die  Besorgnisse  des  Man  zurückholen  will.’  While  we  feel  that  the
meaning of this sentence is probably as we have represented it, the grammar is quite ambiguous.

H. 290

 

And so with regard to the ordinary kind of Being of Dasein itself, there
is no guarantee that the way of interpreting conscience which springs from
it or the theories of conscience which are thus oriented, have arrived at the
right  ontological  horizon  for  its  Interpretation.  In  spite  of  this,  even  the
ordinary  experience  of  conscience  must  somehow—pre-ontologically—
reach this phenomenon. Two things follow from this: on the one hand, the
everyday  way  of  interpreting  conscience  cannot  be  accepted  as  the  final
criterion for the ‘Objectivity’ of an ontological analysis. On the other hand,
such  an  analysis  has  no  right  to  disregard  the  everyday  understanding  of
conscience  and  to  pass  over  the  anthropological,  psychological,  and
theological  theories  of  conscience  which  have  been  based  upon  it.  If
existential  analysis  has  laid  bare  the  phenomenon  of  conscience  in  its
ontological  roots,  then  precisely  in  terms  of  this  analysis  the  ordinary
interpretations must become intelligible; and they must become intelligible
not least in the ways in which they miss the phenomenon and in the reasons
why they conceal it. But since in the context of the problems of this treatise
the  analysis  of  conscience  is  merely  ancillary  to  what  is  ontologically  the
fundamental  question,  we  must  be  satisfied  with  alluding  to  the  essential
problems  when  we  characterize  the  connection  between  the  existential
Interpretation of conscience and the way it is ordinarily interpreted.

In  this  ordinary  interpretation  there  are  four  objections  which  might  be
brought up against our Interpretation of conscience as the summons of care
to Being-guilty: (1) that the function of conscience is essentially critical; (2)
that conscience always speaks in a way that is relative to some definite deed
which  has  been  performed  or  willed;  (3)  that  when  the  ‘voice’  is
experienced, it is never so radically related to Dasein’s Being; (4) that our
Interpretation  takes  no  account  of  the  basic  forms  of  the  phenomenon
—‘evil’  conscience  and  ‘good’,  that  which  ‘reproves’  and  that  which
‘warns’.

Let  us  begin  our  discussion  with  the  last  of  these  considerations.  In  all
interpretations  of  conscience,  the  ‘evil’  or  ‘bad’  conscience  gets  the
priority: conscience is primarily ‘evil’; such a conscience makes known to
us  that  in  every  experience  of  conscience  something  like  a  ‘Guilty!’  gets
experienced  first.  But  in  the  idea  of  bad  conscience,  how  is  this  making-
known of Being-evil understood? The ‘Experience of conscience’ turns up

after  the  deed  has  been  done  or  left  undone.  The  voice  follows  the
transgression and points back to that event which has befallen and by which
Dasein  has  loaded  itself  with  guilt.  If  conscience  makes  known  a  ‘Being-
guilty’, then it cannot do this by summoning us to something, but it does so
by remembering the guilt which has been incurred, and referring to it.

H. 291

 

the  phenomenon  has  been  brought  by 

But does the ‘fact’ that the voice comes afterwards, prevent the call from
being  basically  a  calling-forth?  That  the  voice  gets  taken  as  a  stirring  of
conscience which follows  after is  not  enough  to  prove  that  we  understand
the  phenomenon  of  conscience  primordially.  What  if  factical  indebtedness
were only the occasion for the factical calling of conscience? What if that
Interpretation  of the  ‘evil’  conscience which we  have described goes only
half way? That such is the case is evident from the ontological fore-having
within  whose  scope 
this
Interpretation. The voice is something that turns up; it has its position in the
sequence of Experiences which are present-at-hand, and it follows after the
Experience  of  the  deed.  But  neither  the  call,  nor  the  deed  which  has
happened, nor the guilt with which one is laden, is an occurrence with the
character of something present-at-hand which runs its course. The call has
the  kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to  care.  In  the  call  Dasein  ‘is’  ahead  of
itself  in  such  a  way  that  at  the  same  time  it  directs  itself  back  to  its
thrownness.  Only  by  first  positing  that  Dasein  is  an  interconnected
sequence  of  successive  Experiences,  is  it  possible  to  take  the  voice  as
something  which  comes  afterwards,  something  later,  which  therefore
necessarily  refers  back.  The  voice  does  call  back,  but  it  calls  beyond  the
deed which has happened, and back to the Being-guilty into which one has
been thrown, which is ‘earlier’ than any indebtedness. But at the same time,
this calling-back calls forth to Being-guilty, as something to be seized upon
in  one’s  own  existence,  so  that  authentic  existentiell  Being-guilty  only
‘follows  after’  the  call,  not  vice versa. Bad  conscience  is  basically  so  far
from just reproving and pointing back that it rather points forward(1) as it
calls  one  back  into  one’s  thrownness.  The  order  of  the  sequence  in  which
Experiences run their course does not give us the phenomenal structure of
existing.

If we cannot reach the primordial phenomenon by a characterization of
‘bad’  conscience,  still  less  can  we  do  so  by  a  characterization  of  ‘good’
conscience, whether we take this as a self-subsistent(2) form of conscience
or  as  one  which  is  essentially  founded  upon  ‘bad’  conscience.  Just  as
Dasein’s ‘Being-evil’ would be made known to us in the ‘bad’ conscience,
the ‘good’ conscience must have made known its ‘Being-good’. It is easy to
see that the conscience which used to be an ‘effluence of the divine power’
now becomes a slave of Pharisaism. Such a conscience would let a man say
of himself ‘I am good’; who else can say this than the good man himself,
and  who  would  be  less  willing  to  affirm  it?  But  if  this  impossible
conclusion  is  drawn  from  the  idea  of  the  good  conscience,  the  fact  that
‘Being-guilty” is what the conscience calls, only comes to the fore.
 

1.  ‘vorweisend’.  We have  followed  English  idiom in translating ‘vorweisen’  as ‘point forward’
and ‘vorrufen’ as ‘call forth’; but the prefix ‘vor-’ is the same in both cases, and means ‘forward’ as
opposed to ‘backward’.

2 .‘selbständige’. See note 1, H. 117 and note 1, H. 303.

H. 292

 

To escape this conclusion, the “good’ conscience has been Interpreted as
a  privation  of  the  ‘bad’  one,  and  defined  as  ‘an  Experienced  lack  of  bad
conscience’.(viii) This would make it an experience of not having the call
turn up—that is, of my having nothing with which to reproach myself. But
how  is  such  a  ‘lack’  ‘Experienced’?  This  supposed  Experience  is  by  no
means the experiencing of a call; it is rather a making-certain(1) that a deed
attributed  to  Dasein  has  not  been  perpetrated  by  it  and  that  Dasein  is
therefore not guilty. Becoming certain that one has not done something, has
by  no  means  the  character  of  a  conscience-phenomenon.  It  can,  however,
signify rather that one is forgetting one’s conscience—in other words, that
one is emerging from the possibility of being able to be appealed to. In the
‘certainty’  here  mentioned  lurks  the  tranquillizing  suppression  of  one’s
wanting to have a conscience—that is, of understanding one’s ownmost and
constant  Being-guilty.  The  ‘good’  conscience  is  neither  a  self-subsistent
form of conscience, nor a founded form of conscience; in short, it is not a
conscience-phenomenon at all.
 

viii.  Cf.  Max  Scheler,  Der  Formalismus  in  der  Ethik  und  die  materiale  Wertethik,  Part  Two,
Jahrbuch für philosophie und phänomologische Forschung, vol. II (1916), p. 192. [This passage is
found on page 335 of the fourth edition, Francke Verlag, Bern, 1954—Tr.]
 

1.  In  this  paragraph  Heidegger  takes  pains  to  disassociate  ‘Gewissen’  (‘conscience’)  from  the
(‘making  certain’),

its  derivatives—‘Sichvergewissern’ 

adjective 
‘Gewisswerden’ (‘becoming certain’), and ‘Gewissheit’ (‘certainty’).

(‘certain’)  and 

‘gewiss’ 

In so far as talk about a ‘good’ conscience arises from everyday Dasein’s
way  of  experiencing  the  conscience,  everyday  Dasein  merely  betrays
thereby that even when it speaks of the ‘bad’ conscience it basically fails to
reach  the  phenomenon.  For  the  idea  of  the  ‘bad’  conscience  is  oriented
factically  by  that  of  the  ‘good’  conscience.  The  everyday  interpretation
keeps  within  the  dimension  of  concernfully  reckoning  up  ‘guilt’  and
‘innocence’ [“Unschuld”] and balancing them off. This, then, is the horizon
within which the voice of conscience gets ‘Experienced’.

In  characterizing  what  is  primordial  in  the  ideas  of  ‘bad’  and  ‘good’
conscience, we have also decided as to the distinction between a conscience
which points forward and warns and one which points back and reproves.
The idea of the warning conscience seems, of course, to come closest to the
phenomenon of the summons. It shares with this the character of pointing
forward.  But  this  agreement  is  just  an  illusion.  When  we  experience  a
warning  conscience,  the  voice  is  regarded  in  turn  as  merely  oriented
towards the deed which has been willed, from which it seeks to preserve us.
But  the  warning,  as  a  check  on  what  we  have  willed,  is  possible  only
because the ‘warning’ call is aimed at Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being—that
is,  at  its  understanding  of  itself  in  Being-guilty;  not  until  we  have  such
understanding  does  ‘what  we  have  willed’  get  shattered.  The  conscience
which warns us has the function of regulating from moment to moment our
remaining  free  from  indebtednesses.(1)  In  the  experience  of  a  ‘warning’
conscience the tendency of its call is seen only to the extent that it remains
accessible to the common sense of the “they”.
 

1.  ‘Das  warnende  Gewissen  hat  die  Funktion  der  momentweisen  Regelung  eines  Freibleibens

von Verschuldungen.’ The earlier editions contradict this by writing ‘…hat nicht die Funktion...’

H. 293

 

The third consideration which we have mentioned invokes the fact that
the  everyday  experience  of  the  conscience  has  no  acquaintance  with
anything  like  getting  summoned  to  Being-guilty.  This  must  be  conceded.
But does this everyday experience thus give us any guarantee that the full
possible  content  of  the  call  of  the  voice  of  conscience  has  been  heard
therein?  Does  it  follow  from  this  that  theories  of  conscience  which  are
based  on  the  ordinary  way  of  experiencing  it  have  made  certain  that  their
ontological  horizon  for  analysing  this  phenomenon  is  an  appropriate  one?
Does  not  falling,  which  is  an  essential  kind  of  Being  for  Dasein,  show  us
rather  that  ontically  this  entity  understands  itself  proximally  and  for  the
most  part  in  terms  of  the  horizon  of  concern,  but  that  ontologically,  it
defines  “Being”  in  the  sense  of  presence-at-hand?  This,  however,  leads  to
covering up the phenomenon in two ways: what one sees in this theory is a
sequence of Experiences or ‘psychical processes’—a sequence whose kind
of  Being  is  for  the  most  part  wholly  indefinite.  In  such  experience  the
conscience is encountered as an arbiter and admonisher, with whom Dasein
reckons and pleads its cause.

When Kant represented the conscience as a ‘court of justice’ and made
this  the  basic  guiding  idea  in  his  Interpretation  of  it,  he  did  not  do  so  by
accident;  this  was  suggested  by  the  idea  of  moral  law—although  his
conception  of  morality  was  far  removed  from  utilitarianism  and
eudaemonism. Even the theory of value, whether it is regarded formally or
materially, has as its unexpressed ontological presupposition a ‘metaphysic
of morals’—that is, an ontology of Dasein and existence. Dasein is regarded
as an entity with which one might concern oneself, whether this “concern”
has the sense of ‘actualizing values’ or of satisfying a norm.

If  one  is  to  invoke  the  full  range  of  what  the  everyday  experience  of
conscience—as the only higher court for the Interpretation of conscience—
is  acquainted  with,  this  cannot  be  justified  unless  one  has  considered
the  conscience  can  ever  become  authentically
beforehand  whether 
accessible here at all.

Thus  the  further  objection  that  the  existential  Interpretation  overlooks
the  fact  that  the  call  of  conscience  always  relates  itself  to  some  definite
deed  which  has  been  either  ‘actualized’  or  willed,  also  loses  its  force.  It
cannot  be  denied  that  the  call  is  often  experienced  as  having  such  a
tendency.  It  remains  questionable  only  whether  this  experience  of  the  call
permits it to ‘proclaim’ itself fully. In the common-sense interpretation, one

may  suppose that one is  sticking to  the  ‘facts’; but  in  the  end, by its very
common sense, this interpretation has restricted the call’s disclosive range.
As  little  as  the  ‘good’  conscience  lets  itself  be  put  in  the  service  of  a
‘Pharisaism’,  just  as  little  may  the  function  of  the  ‘bad’  conscience  be
reduced to indicating indebtednesses which are present-at-hand or thrusting
aside  those  which  are  possible.  This  would  be  as  if  Dasein  were  a
‘household’  whose  indebtednesses  simply  need  to  be  balanced  off  in  an
orderly manner so that the Self may stand ‘by’ as a disinterested spectator
while these Experiences run their course.

H. 294

 

If,  however,  that  which  is  primary  in  the  call  is  not  a  relatedness  to  a
guilt  which  is  factically  ‘present-at-hand’,  or  to  some  guilt-charged  deed
which  has  been  factically  willed,  and  if  accordingly  the  ‘reproving’  and
‘warning’ types of conscience express no primordial call-functions, then we
have  also  undermined  the  consideration  we  mentioned  first,  that  the
existential  Interpretation  fails  to  recognize  the  ‘essentially’  critical
character  of  what  the  conscience  does.  This  consideration  too  is  one  that
springs from catching sight of the phenomenon in a manner which, within
certain limits, is genuine; for in the content of the call, one can indeed point
to nothing which the voice ‘positively’ recommends and imposes. But how
are we to understand this positivity which is missing in what the conscience
does? Does it follow from this that conscience has a ‘negative’ character?

We miss a ‘positive’ content in that which is called, because we expect to
be  told  something  currently  useful  about  assured  possibilities  of  ‘taking
action’  which  are  available  and  calculable.  This  expectation  has  its  basis
within  the  horizon  of  that  way  of  interpreting  which  belongs  to  common-
sense concern—a way of interpreting which forces Dasein’s existence to be
subsumed  under  the  idea  of  a  business  procedure  that  can  be  regulated.
Such expectations (and in part these tacitly underlie even the demand for a
material ethic of value as contrasted with one that is ‘merely’ formal) are of
course disappointed by the conscience. The call of conscience fails to give
any  such  ‘practical’  injunctions,  solely  because  it  summons  Dasein  to
existence,  to  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being-its-Self.  With  the  maxims
which  one  might  be  led  to  expect—maxims  which  could  be  reckoned  up
unequivocally—the  conscience  would  deny  to  existence  nothing  less  than

the very possibility of taking action. But because the conscience manifestly
cannot be ‘positive’ in this manner, neither does it function ‘just negatively’
in  this  same  manner.  The  call  discloses  nothing  which  could  be  either
positive or negative as something with which we can concern ourselves; for
what  it  has  in  view  is  a  Being  which  is  ontologically  quite  different—
namely, existence. On the other hand, when the call is rightly understood, it
gives  us  that  which  in  the  existential  sense  is  the  ‘most  positive’  of  all—
namely,  the  ownmost  possibility  which  Dasein  can  present  to  itself,  as  a
calling-back  which  calls  it  forth  into  its  factical  potentiality-for-being-its-
Self  at  the  time.  To  hear  the  call  authentically,  signifies  bringing  oneself
into  a  factical  taking-action.  But  only  by  setting  forth  the  existential
structure  implied  in  our  understanding  of  the  appeal  when  we  hear  it
authentically,  shall  we  obtain  a  fully  adequate  Interpretation  of  what  is
called in the call.

We  must  first  show  how  the  only  phenomena  with  which  the  ordinary
interpretation  has  any  familiarity  point  back  to  the  primordial  meaning  of
the  call  of  conscience  when  they  are  understood  in  a  way  that  is
the  ordinary
ontologically  appropriate;  we  must 
interpretation springs from the limitations of the way Dasein interprets itself
in falling; and, since falling belongs to care itself, we must also show that
this interpretation, in spite of all its obviousness, is by no means accidental.

then  show 

that 

H. 295

 

In criticizing the ordinary interpretation of the conscience ontologically,
one  might  be  subject  to  the  misunderstanding  of  supposing  that  if  one
demonstrates  that  the  everyday  way  of  experiencing  the  conscience  is  not
existentially  primordial,  one  will  have  made  some  judgment  as  to  the
existentiell ‘moral quality’ of any Dasein which maintains itself in that kind
of experience. Just as little as existence is necessarily and directly impaired
by  an  ontologically  inadequate  way  of  understanding  the  conscience,  so
little  does  an  existentially  appropriate  Interpretation  of  the  conscience
guarantee that one has understood the call in an existentiell manner. It is no
less  possible  to  be  serious  when  one  experiences  the  conscience  in  the
ordinary way than not to be serious when one’s understanding of it is more
primordial.  Nevertheless,  the  Interpretation  which  is  more  primordial
existentially,  also  discloses  possibilities  for  a  more  primordial  existentiell

understanding,  as  long  as  our  ontological  conceptualization  does  not  let
itself get cut off from our ontical experience.

60.  The  Existential  Structure  of  the  Authentic  Potentiality-for-Being

which is Attested in the Conscience
 

The existential Interpretation of conscience is to exhibit an attestation of
Dasein’s ownmost potentiality-for-Being—an attestation which is [seiende]
in Dasein itself. Conscience attests not by making something known in an
undifferentiated manner, but by calling forth and summoning us to Being-
guilty.  That  which  is  so  attested  becomes  ‘grasped’  in  the  hearing  which
understands  the  call  undisguisedly  in  the  sense  it  has  itself  intended.  The
understanding of the appeal is a mode of Dasein’s Being, and only as such
does  it  give  us  the  phenomenal  content  of  what  the  call  of  conscience
attests.  The  authentic  understanding  of  the  call  has  been  characterized  as
“wanting to have a conscience”. This is a way of letting one’s ownmost Self
take  action  in  itself  of  its  own  accord  in  its  Being-guilty,  and  represents
phenomenally  that  authentic  potentiality-for-Being  which  Dasein  itself
attests. The existential structure of this must now be laid bare. Only so can
we  proceed  to  the  basic  constitution  of  the  authenticity  of  Dasein’s
existence as disclosed in Dasein itself.

Wanting to have a conscience is, as an understanding of oneself in one’s
ownmost potentiality-for-Being, a way in which Dasein has been disclosed.
This disclosedness is constituted by discourse and state-of-mind, as well as
by  understanding.  To  understand  in  an  existentiell  manner  implies
projecting oneself in  each case  upon  one’s ownmost  factical  possibility of
having  the  potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world.  But  the  potentiality-for-
Being is understood only by existing in this possibility.

H. 296

 

What kind  of mood  corresponds to  such understanding? Understanding
the  call  discloses  one’s  own  Dasein 
its
individualization. The uncanniness which is revealed in understanding and
revealed along with it, becomes genuinely disclosed by the state-of-mind of
anxiety  which  belongs  to  that  understanding.  The  fact  of  the  anxiety  of

the  uncannines  of 

in 

conscience,  gives  us  phenomenal  confirmation  that  in  understanding  the
call  Dasein  is  brought  face  to  face  with  its  own  uncanniness.  Wanting-to-
have-a-conscience becomes a readiness for anxiety.

The third essential item in disclosedness is discourse. The call itself is a
primordial  kind  of  discourse  for  Dasein;  but  there  is  no  corresponding
counter-discourse in which, let us say, one talks about what the conscience
has  said,  and  pleads  one’s  cause.  In  hearing  the  call  understandingly,  one
denies oneself any counter-discourse, not because one has been assailed by
some  ‘obscure  power’,  which  suppresses  one’s  hearing,  but  because  this
hearing  has  appropriated  the  content  of  the  call  unconcealedly.  In  the  call
one’s  constant  Being-guilty  is  represented,  and  in  this  way  the  Self  is
brought back from the loud idle talk which goes with the common sense of
the  “they”.  Thus  the  mode  of  Articulative  discourse  which  belongs  to
wanting to have a conscience, is one of reticence. Keeping silent has been
characterized as an essential possibility of discourse.(ix) Anyone who keeps
silent  when  he  wants  to  give  us  to  understand  something,  must  ‘have
something  to  say’.  In  the  appeal  Dasein  gives  itself  to  understand  its
ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.  This  calling  is  therefore  a  keeping-silent.
The discourse of the conscience never comes to utterance. Only in keeping
silent  does  the  conscience  call;  that  is  to  say,  the  call  comes  from  the
soundlessness  of  uncanniness,  and  the  Dasein  which  it  summons  is  called
back  into  the  stillness  of  itself,  and  called  back  as  something  that  is  to
become still. Only in reticence, therefore, is this silent discourse understood
appropriately in wanting to have a conscience. It takes the words away from
the common-sense idle talk of the “they”.

The  common-sense  way  of  interpreting  the  conscience,  which  ‘sticks
rigorously  to  the  facts’,  takes  the  silent  discourse  of  the  conscience  as  an
occasion for passing it off as something which is not at all ascertainable or
present-at-hand. The fact that “they”, who hear and understand nothing but
loud idle talk, cannot ‘report’ any call, is held against the conscience on the
subterfuge  that  it  is  ‘dumb’  and  manifestly  not  present-at-hand.  With  this
kind of interpretation the “they” merely covers up its own failure to hear the
call and the fact that its ‘hearing’ does not reach very far.
 

ix. Cf. Section 34, H. 164.

H. 297

 

 

The  disclosedness  of  Dasein  in  wanting  to  have  a  conscience,  is  thus
constituted by anxiety as state-of-mind, by understanding as a projection of
oneself  upon  one’s  ownmost  Being-guilty,  and  by  discourse  as  reticence.
This  distinctive  and  authentic  disclosedness,  which  is  attested  in  Dasein
itself  by  its  conscience—this  reticent  self-projection  upon  one’s  ownmost
Being-guilty, in which one is ready for anxiety—we call “resoluteness”.

Resoluteness  is  a  distinctive  mode  of  Dasein’s  disclosedness.(1)  In  an
earlier passage, however, we have Interpreted disclosedness existentially as
the primordial truth.(x) Such truth is primarily not a quality of ‘judgment’
nor of any definite way of behaving, but something essentially constitutive
for Being-in-the-world as such. Truth must be conceived as a fundamental
existentiale. In our ontological clarification of the proposition that ‘Dasein
is  in  the  truth’  we  have called  attention  to  the  primordial  disclosedness of
this entity as the truth of existence; and for the delimitation of its character
we have referred to the analysis of Dasein’s authenticity.(xi)

In  resoluteness  we  have  now  arrived  at  that  truth  of  Dasein  which  is
most primordial because it is authentic. Whenever a “there” is disclosed, its
whole Being-in-the-world—that is to say, the world, Being-in, and the Self
which, as an ‘I am’, this entity is—is disclosed with equal primordiality.(2)
 

x. Cf. Section 44, H. 212 ff.
xi. Cf. ibid., H. 221.

1.  The 

etymological 

connection 

between 

‘Entschlossenheit’ 

(‘resoluteness’) 

and

‘Erschlossenheit’ (‘disclosedness’) is not to be overlooked.

2. ‘Die Erschlossenheit des Da erschliesst gleichursprünglich das je ganze In-der-Welt-sein, das
heisst  die  Welt,  das  In-Sein  und  das  Selbst,  das  als  “ich  bin”  dieses  Seiende  ist.’  It  is  not  clear
grammatically  whether  ‘dieses  Seiende’  or  the  pronoun  ‘das’  is  the  subject  of  the  final  clause,  or
whether ‘this entity’ is ‘Dasein’ or ‘Being-in’. The grammatical function of the ‘als “ich bin” ’ is also
doubtful. In support of our interpretation, consult H. 54, 114, 117, 267.

Whenever  the  world  is  disclosed,  entities  within-the-world  have  been
discovered  already.  The  discoveredness  of  the  ready-to-hand  and  the
present-at-hand  is  based  on  the  disclosedness  of  the  world(xii)  for  if  the
current totality of involvements is to be freed, this requires that significance
be understood beforehand. In understanding significance, concernful Dasein
submits itself circumspectively to what it encounters as ready-to-hand. Any
discovering  of  a  totality  of  involvements  goes  back  to  a  “for-the-sake-of-

which”;  and  on  the  understanding  of  such  a  “for-the-sake-of-which”  is
based in turn the understanding of significance as the disclosedness of the
current world. In seeking shelter, sustenance, livelihood, we do so “for the
sake of” constant possibilities of Dasein which are very close to it;(1) upon
these the entity for which its own Being is an issue, has already projected
itself. Thrown into its ‘there’, every Dasein has been factically submitted to
a definite ‘world’—its ‘world’. At the same time those factical projections
which  are  closest  to  it,  have  been  guided  by  its  concernful  lostness in  the
“they”. To this lostness, one’s own Dasein can appeal, and this appeal can
be  understood  in  the  way  of  resoluteness.  But  in  that  case  this  authentic
disclosedness modifies with equal primordiality both the way in which the
‘world’ is discovered (and this is founded upon that disclosedness) and the
way in which the Dasein-with of Others is disclosed. The ‘world’ which is
ready-to-hand  does  not  become  another  one  ‘in  its  content’,  nor  does  the
circle of Others get exchanged for a new one; but both one’s Being towards
the  ready-to-hand  understandingly  and  concernfully,  and  one’s  solicitous
Being  with  Others,  are  now  given  a  definite  character  in  terms  of  their
ownmost potentiality-for-Being-their-Selves.
 

xii. Cf. Section 18, H. 83 ff

1.  ‘Das  Umwillen  des  Unterkommens,  des  Unterhalts,  des  Fortkommens  sind  nächste  und

ständige Möglichkeiten des Daseins...’

 

 

H. 298

Resoluteness, as authentic Being-one’s-Self, does not detach Dasein from
its  world,  nor  does  it  isolate  it  so  that  it  becomes  a  free-floating  “I”.  And
how  should 
is
authentically nothing else than Being-in-the-world? Resoluteness brings the
Self right into its current concernful Being-alongside what is ready-to-hand,
and pushes it into solicitous Being with Others.

resoluteness  as  authentic  disclosedness, 

it,  when 

In  the  light  of  the  “for-the-sake-of-which”  of  one’s  self-chosen
potentiality-for-Being,  resolute  Dasein  frees  itself  for  its  world.  Dasein’s
resoluteness towards  itself is  what first  makes it possible  to  let the  Others
who  are  with  it  ‘be’  in  their  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being,  and  to  co-
disclose  this  potentiality  in  the  solicitude  which  leaps  forth  and  liberates.
When Dasein is resolute, it can become the ‘conscience’ of Others. Only by

authentically Being-their-Selves in resoluteness can people authentically be
with one another—not by ambiguous and jealous stipulations and talkative
fraternizing in the “they” and in what “they” want to undertake.

Resoluteness,  by  its  ontological  essence,  is  always  the  resoluteness  of
some factical Dasein at a particular time. The essence of Dasein as an entity
is  its  existence.  Resoluteness  ‘exists’  only  as  a  resolution  [Entschluss]
which  understandingly  projects  itself.  But  on  what  basis  does  Dasein
disclose  itself  in  resoluteness?  On  what  is  it  to  resolve?(1)  Only  the
resolution itself can give the answer. One would completely misunderstand
the  phenomenon  of  resoluteness  if  one  should  want  to  suppose  that  this
consists  simply  in  taking  up  possibilities  which  have  been  proposed  and
recommended,  and  seizing  hold  of  them.  The  resolution  is  precisely  the
disclosive projection and determination of what is factically possible at the
time. To resoluteness, the indefiniteness characteristic of every potentiality-
for-Being  into which Dasein has been factically thrown, is  something that
necessarily belongs. Only in a resolution is resoluteness sure of itself. The
existentiell indefiniteness of resoluteness never makes itself definite except
in a resolution; yet it has, all the same, its existential definiteness.

H. 299

 

in 

What  one 

resolves  upon 

resoluteness  has  been  prescribed
ontologically in the existentiality of Dasein in general as a potentiality-for-
Being in the manner of concernful solicitude. As care, however, Dasein has
been  Determined  by  facticity  and  falling.  Disclosed  in  its  ‘there’,  it
maintains  itself  both  in  truth  and  in  untruth  with  equal  primordiality.(xiii)
This  ‘really’  holds  in  particular  for  resoluteness  as  authentic  truth.
Resoluteness  appropriates  untruth  authentically.  Dasein  is  already  in
irresoluteness 
[Unentschlossenheit],  and  soon,  perhaps,  will  be  in  it  again.  The  term
“irresoluteness’  merely  expresses  that  phenomenon  which  we  have
Interpreted  as  a  Being-surrendered  to  the  way  in  which  things  have  been
prevalently interpreted by the “they”. Dasein, as a they-self, gets ‘lived’ by
the  common-sense  ambiguity  of  that  publicness  in  which  nobody  resolves
upon  anything  but  which  has  always  made  its  decision.(2)  “Resoluteness”
signifies  letting  oneself  be  summoned  out  of  one’s  lostness  in  the  “they”.
The  irresoluteness  of  the  “they”  remains  dominant  notwithstanding,  but  it

inasmuch  as  resoluteness 

cannot impugn resolute existence. In the counter-concept to irresoluteness,
as  resoluteness  as  existentially  understood,  we  do  not  have  in  mind  any
ontico-psychical  characteristic  in  the  sense  of  Being-burdened  with
inhibitions.  Even  resolutions  remain  dependent  upon  the  “they”  and  its
world.  The  understanding  of  this  is  one  of  the  things  that  a  resolution
is  what  first  gives  authentic
discloses, 
transparency to Dasein. In resoluteness the issue for Dasein is its ownmost
potentiality-for-Being,  which, as something thrown, can project  itself only
upon definite factical possibilities. Resolution does not withdraw itself from
‘actuality’, but discovers first what is factically possible; and it does so by
seizing  upon  it  in  whatever  way  is  possible  for  it  as  its  ownmost
potentiality-for-Being  in  the  “they”.  The  existential  attributes  of  any
possible  resolute  Dasein  include  the  items  constitutive  for  an  existential
phenomenon  which  we  call  a  “Situation”  and  which  we  have  hitherto
passed over.
 

xiii. Cf. Section 44b, H. 222.

1.  ‘Aber  woraufhin  erschliesst  sich  das  Dasein  in  der  Entschlossenheit?  Wozu  soll  es  sich
entschliessen?’ (For similar constructions with ‘woraufhin’ etc. and ‘erschliessen’, see H. 141, 143,
145 above.)

2.  ‘Das  Dasein  wird  als  Man-selbst  von  der  verständigen  Zweideutigkeit  der  Öffentlichkeit
“gelebt”,  in  der  sich  niemand  entschliesst,  und  die  doch  schon  immer  beschlossen  hat.’  The
etymological connection between ‘entschliesst’ and ‘beschlossen’ is lost in our translation.

 

 

H. 300

In  the  term  “Situation”  (“situation”—‘to  be  in  a  situation’)  there  is  an
overtone  of  a  signification  that  is  spatial.(1)  We  shall  not  try  to  eliminate
this from the existential conception, for such an overtone is also implied in
the  ‘there’  of  Dasein.  Being-in-the-world  has  a  spatiality  of  its  own,
characterized by the phenomena of de-severance and directionality. Dasein
‘makes room’ in so far as it factically exists.(xiv) But spatiality of the kind
which  belongs  to  Dasein,  and  on  the  basis  of  which  existence  always
determines its ‘location’, is grounded in the state of Being-in-the-world, for
which  disclosedness  is  primarily  constitutive.  Just  as  the  spatiality  of  the
“there”  is  grounded  in  disclosedness,  the  Situation  has  its  foundations  in
resoluteness. The Situation is the “there” which is disclosed in resoluteness
—the  “there”  as  which  the  existent  entity  is  there.  It  is  not  a  framework

removed 

itself.  Far 

present-at-hand  in  which  Dasein  occurs,  or  into  which  it  might  even  just
bring 
from  any  present-at-hand  mixture  of
circumstances and accidents which we encounter, the Situation is only  t h r
o u g h  resoluteness and  i n  i t. The current factical involvement-character
of the circumstances discloses itself to the Self only when that involvement-
character is such that one has resolved upon the “there” as which that Self,
in  existing,  has  to  be.(2)  When  what  we  call  “accidents”  befall  from  the
with-world and the environment, they can be-fall only resoluteness.(3)

For the “they”, however, the Situation is essentially something that has

been closed off.(4)
 

xiv. Cf. Sections 23 and 24, H. 104 ff.

 

respectively.

1.  The  German  words  ‘Situation’  and  ‘Lage’  will  be  translated  by  ‘Situation’  and  ‘situation’

2. ‘Entschlossen für das Da, als welches das Selbst existierend zu sein hat, erschliesst sich ihm

erst der jeweilige faktische Bewandtnischarakter der Umstände.’

3.  ‘Nur  der  Ent-schlossenheit  kann  das  aus  der  Mit-  und  Umwelt  zu-fallen,  was  wir  Zufälle
nennen.’  Literally  a  ‘Zufall’  (‘accident’)  is  something  that  ‘falls  to’  something,  or  ‘befalls’  it.
(Compare the Latin ‘accidens’, which has basically the same meaning).

4. ‘verschlossen’. Contrast ‘erschlossen’ (‘disclosed’) and ‘entschlossen’ (‘resolved’).

The  “they”  knows  only  the  ‘general  situation’,  loses  itself  in  those
‘opportunities’  which  are  closest  to  it,  and  pays  Dasein’s  way  by  a
reckoning  up  of  ‘accidents’  which  it  fails  to  recognize,  deems  its  own
achievement, and passes off as such.(1)

Resoluteness  brings  the  Being  of  the  “there”  into  the  existence  of  its
Situation.  Indeed  it  delimits  the  existential  structure  of  that  authentic
potentiality-for-Being  which  the  conscience  attests—wanting  to  have  a
conscience. In this potentiality we have recognized the appropriate way of
understanding the appeal. This makes it entirely plain that when the call of
conscience  summons  us  to  our  potentiality-for-Being,  it  does  not  hold
before  us  some  empty  ideal  of  existence,  but  calls  us  forth  into  the
Situation. This existential positivity which the call of conscience possesses
when rightly understood, gives us at the same time an insight: it makes us
see  to  what  extent  we  fail  to  recognize  the  disclosive  character  of  the
conscience if the tendency of the call is restricted to indebtednesses which
have already occurred or which we have before us; it also makes us see to
what  extent  the  concrete  understanding  of  the  voice  of  conscience  is  only

seemingly  transmitted  to  us  if  this  restriction  is  made.  When  our
understanding of the appeal is Interpreted existentially as resoluteness, the
conscience is revealed as that kind of Being—included in the very basis of
Dasein(2)—in which Dasein makes possible for itself its factical existence,
thus attesting its ownmost potentiality-for-Being.

This phenomenon which we have exhibited as “resoluteness’ can hardly
be  confused  with  an  empty  ‘habitus’  or  an 
indefinite  ‘velleity’.
Resoluteness  does  not  first  take  cognizance  of  a  Situation  and  put  that
Situation  before  itself;  it  has  put  itself  into  that  Situation  already.(3)  As
resolute,  Dasein  is  already  taking action.  The  term  ‘take  action’(4)  is  one
which  we  are  purposely  avoiding.  For  in  the  first  place  this  term  must  be
taken so broadly that “activity” [Aktivität] will also embrace the passivity
of  resistance.  In  the  second  place,  it  suggests  a  misunderstanding  in  the
ontology  of  Dasein,  as  if  resoluteness  were  a  special  way  of  behaviour
belonging to the practical faculty as contrasted with one that is theoretical.
Care,  however,  as  concernful  solicitude,  so  primordially  and  wholly
envelops  Dasein’s  Being  that  it  must  already  be  presupposed  as  a  whole
when we distinguish between theoretical and practical behaviour; it cannot
first  be  built  up  out  of  these  faculties  by  a  dialectic  which,  because  it  is
existentially  ungrounded,  is  necessarily  quite  baseless.  Resoluteness,
however, is only that authenticity which, in care, is the object of care [in der
Sorge  gesorgte],  and  which  is  possible  as  care—the  authenticity  of  care
itself.
 

1.  ‘Es  kennt  nur  die  “allgemeine  Lage”,  verliert  sich  an  die  nächsten  “Gelegenheiten”  und
bestreitet  das  Dasein  aus  der  Verrechnung  der  “Zufälle”,  die  es,  sie  verkennend,  für  die  eigene
Leistung hält und ausgibt.’ We have preserved the grammatical ambiguity of the pronouns ‘die’ and
‘es’.

2.  ‘…als  die  im  Grunde  des  Daseins  beschlossene  Seinsart...’  The  participle  ‘beschlossene’,
which is etymologically akin to ‘erschlossen’, etc., may mean either ‘included’ or ‘decided upon’, as
we have seen on H. 299. Very likely both meanings are here intended.

3. ‘Die Entschlossenheit stellt sich nicht erst, kenntnisnehmend, eine Situation vor, sondern hat
sich schon in sie gestellt.’ Our rather literal translation brings out the contrast between ‘sich stellen
in...’  (‘put  itself  in...’)  and  ‘sich  stellen...  vor...’  (‘put  before  itself...’),  but  fails  to  bring  out  the
important sense of the latter expression: ‘to represent’ or ‘to form an idea of’.

4. ‘ “Handeln” ’. Far from avoiding this term, Heidegger has used it quite frequently. But he is

avoiding it as a possible substitute for the term ‘Entschlossenheit’.

H. 301

 

To present the factical existentiell possibilities in their chief features and
interconnections,  and  to  Interpret  them  according  to  their  existential
structure, falls among the tasks of a thematic existential anthropology.(xv)
For  the  purposes  of  the  present  investigation  as  a  study  of  fundamental
ontology,  it  is  enough  if  that  authentic  potentiality-for-Being  which
conscience  attests  for  Dasein  itself  in  terms  of  Dasein  itself,  is  defined
existentially.

Now  that  resoluteness  has  been  worked  out  as  Being-guilty,  a  self-
projection  in  which  one  is  reticent  and  ready  for  anxiety,(1)  our
investigation has been put in a position for defining the ontological meaning
of  that  potentiality  which  we  have  been  seeking—Dasein’s  authentic
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. By now the authenticity of Dasein is neither
an empty term nor an idea which someone has fabricated. But even so, as
an  authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole,  the  authentic  Being-towards-
death which we have deduced existentially still remains a purely existential
project  for  which  Dasein’s  attestation  is  missing.  Only  when  such
attestation  has  been  found  will  our  investigation  suffice  to  exhibit  (as  its
authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole,
problematic 
existentially  confirmed  and  clarified—a  potentiality  which  belongs  to
Dasein. For  only  when  this entity  has become phenomenally accessible in
its authenticity and its totality, will the question of the meaning of the Being
of this entity, to whose existence there belongs in general an understanding
of Being, be based upon something which will stand any test.
 

requires) 

an 

xv. In the direction of such a problematic, Karl Jaspers is the first to have explicitly grasped the
task of a doctrine of world-views and carried it through. Cf. his Psychologie der Weltanschauungen,
3rd  edition,  1925.  Here  the  question  of  ‘what  man  is’  is  raised  and  answered  in  terms  of  what  he
essentially  can  be.  (Cf.  the  foreword  to  the  first  edition.)  The  basic  existential-ontological
signification of ‘limit-situations’ is thus illumined. One would entirely miss the philosophical import
of this ‘psychology of world-views’ if one were to ‘use’ it simply as a reference-work for ‘types of
world-view’.
 

1.  ‘Mit  der  Herausarbeitung  der  Entschlossenheit  als  des  verschwiegenen,  angstbereiten
Sichentwerfens  auf  das  eigenste  Schuldigsein...’  The  earlier  editions  have  ‘...dem  verschwiegenen,
angstbereiten Sichentwerfen auf...’

III: DASEIN’S AUTHENTIC POTENTIALITY-FOR-BEING-A-
WHOLE, AND TEMPORALITY AS THE ONTOLOGICAL
MEANING OF CARE

 

 

61.  A  Preliminary  Sketch  of  the  Methodological  Step  from  the
Definition  of  Dasein’s  Authentic  Being-a-whole  to  the  Laying-bare  of
Temporality as a Phenomenon
 

H. 302

AN  authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole  on  the  part  of  Dasein  has
been  projected  existentially.  By  analysing  this  phenomenon,  we  have
revealed  that  authentic  Being-towards-death  is  anticipation.(i)  Dasein’s
authentic  potentiality-for-Being,  in  its  existentiell  attestation,  has  been
exhibited, and at the same time existentially Interpreted, as resoluteness.(1)
How  are  these  two  phenomena  of  anticipation  and  resoluteness  to  be
brought  together?  Has  not  our  ontological  projection  of  the  authentic
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole led us into a dimension of Dasein which lies
far from the phenomenon of resoluteness? What can death and the ‘concrete
Situation’  of  taking  action  have  in  common?  In  attempting  to  bring
resoluteness and anticipation forcibly together, are we not seduced into an
intolerable  and  quite  unphenomenological  construction,  for  which  we  can
no longer claim that it has the character of an ontological projection, based
upon the phenomena?

Any  superficial  binding  together  of  the  two  phenomena  is  excluded.
There  still  remains  one  way  out,  and  this  is  the  only  possible  method:
namely, to take as our point of departure the phenomenon of resoluteness,
as attested in its existentiell possibility, and to ask: “Does  resoluteness, in
its  ownmost  existentiell  tendency  of  Being,  point  forward  to  anticipatory
resoluteness as its ownmost authentic possibility?” What if resoluteness, in
accordance  with  its  own  meaning,  should  bring  itself  into  its  authenticity
only when it projects itself not upon any random possibilities which just lie

closest,  but  upon  that  uttermost  possibility  which  lies  ahead  of  every
factical  potentiality-for-Being  of  Dasein,(2)  and,  as  such,  enters  more  or
less  undisguisedly  into  every  potentiality-for-Being  of  which  Dasein
factically takes hold?
 

i.  Cf.  Section  58,  H.  280  ff.  [This  reference,  which  appears  in  both  earlier  and  later  editions

seems to be incorrect. Cf. Section53, H. 260 ff.—Tr.]
 

1.  ‘In  seiner  existenziellen  Bezeugung  wurde  das  eigentliche  Seinkönnen  des  Daseins  als
Entschlossenheit aufgezeigt  und  zugleich  existenzial  interpretiert.’  In  the  earlier  editions  the  words
‘aufgezeigt und zugleich existenzial interpretiert’ are inserted between ‘Bezeugung’ and ‘wurde’, not
in their present position.

2. ‘…die allem faktischen Seinkönnen des Daseins vorgelagert ist...’ Cf. note 1, H. 259 above.

What if it is only in the anticipation of [zum] death that resoluteness, as
Dasein’s authentic truth, has reached the authentic certainty which belongs
to  it?  What  if  it  is  only  in  the  anticipation  if  death  that  all  the  factical
‘anticipatoriness’ of resolving would be authentically understood—in other
words, that it would be caught up with in an existentiell way?(1)
 

1. “Wenn im Vorlaufen zum Tode erst alle faktische “Vorläufigkeit” des Entschliessens eigentlich
verstanden,  das  heisst  existenziell  eingeholt wäre?’  Our  translation  of  ‘Vorlaufen’  as  ‘anticipation’
again fails to bring out the metaphor of ‘running ahead’, with which the notion of ‘catching up’ is
here clearly connected. (Cf. our note 3, H. 262 above.) Similarly our translation of ‘Vorläufigkeit’ as
‘anticipatoriness’,  which  brings  out  the  connection  with  ‘vorlaufen’,  is  out  of  line  with  our  usual
translation of the adjective ‘vorläufig’ as ‘provisional’.

H. 303

 

In  our  existential  Interpretation,  the  entity  which  has  been  presented  to
us as our theme has Dasein’s kind of Being, and cannot be pieced together
into something present-at-hand out of pieces which are present-at-hand. So
long  as  we  do  not  forget  this,  every  step  in  our  Interpretation  must  be
guided by the idea of existence. What this signifies for the question of the
possible  connection  between  anticipation  and  resoluteness,  is  nothing  less
than  the  demand  that we  should  project  these existential  phenomena upon
the existentiell possibilities which have been delineated in them, and ‘think
these possibilities through to the end’ in an existential manner. If we do this,
the  working-out  of  anticipatory  resoluteness  as  a  potentiality-for-Being-a-
whole  such  that  this  potentiality  is  authentic  and  is  possible  in  an

existentiell way, will lose the character of an arbitrary construction. It will
have  become  a  way  of  Interpreting  whereby  Dasein  is  liberated  for  its
uttermost possibility of existence.

In  taking  this  step,  the  existential  Interpretation  makes  known  at  the
same  time  its  ownmost  methodological  character.  Up  till  now,  except  for
some remarks which were occasionally necessary, we have deferred explicit
discussions  of  method.  Our  first  task  was  to  ‘go  forth’  towards  the
phenomena. But, before laying bare the meaning of the Being of an entity
which has been revealed in its basic phenomenal content, we must stop for
a while in the course of our investigation, not for the purpose of ‘resting’,
but so that we may be impelled the more keenly.

Any  genuine  method  is  based  on  viewing  in  advance  in  an  appropriate
way the basic constitution of the ‘object’ to be disclosed, or of the domain
within which the object lies. Thus any genuinely methodical consideration
—which is to be distinguished from empty discussions of technique—must
likewise  give  information about  the  kind  of Being  of the  entity which has
been  taken  as  our  theme.  The  clarification  of  the  methodological
possibilities,  requirements,  and  limitations  of  the  existential  analytic  in
general, can alone secure the transparency which is necessary if we are to
take the  basic step of unveiling the  meaning  of the  Being  of care. But  the
Interpretation of the ontological meaning of care must be performed on the
basis  of  envisaging  phenomenologically  in  a  full  and  constant  manner
Dasein’s existential constitution as we have exhibited it up till now.

Ontologically,  Dasein  is  in  principle  different  from  everything  that  is
present-at-hand or Real. Its ‘subsistence’ is not based on the substantiality
of  a  substance  but  on  the  ‘Self-subsistence’  of  the  existing  Self,  whose
Being  has  been  conceived  as  care.(1)  The  phenomenon  of  the  Self—a
phenomenon which is included in care—needs to be defined existentially in
a  way  which  is  primordial  and  authentic,  in  contrast  to  our  preparatory
exhibition  of  the  inauthentic  they-self.  Along  with  this,  we  must  establish
what possible ontological questions are to be directed towards the ‘Self’, if
indeed it is neither substance nor subject.

H. 304

 

In this way, the phenomenon of care will be adequately clarified for the
first  time,  and  we  shall  then  interrogate  it  as  to  its  ontological  meaning.

When  this  meaning  has  been  determined,  temporality  will  have  been  laid
bare. In exhibiting this, we are not led into out-of-the-way and sequestered
domains  of  Dasein;  we  merely  get  a  conception  of  the  entire  phenomenal
content of Dasein’s basic existential constitution in the ultimate foundations
of  its  own  ontological  intelligibility.  Temporality  gets  experienced  in  a
phenomenally  primordial  way  in  Dasein’s  authentic  Being-a-whole,  in  the
phenomenon of anticipatory resoluteness. If temporality makes itself known
primordially  in  this,  then  we  may  suppose  that  the  temporality  of
anticipatory  resoluteness  is  a  distinctive  mode  of  temporality.  Temporality
has different possibilities and different ways of temporalizing itself.(2) The
basic  possibilities  of  existence,  the  authenticity  and  inauthenticity  of
Dasein,  are  grounded  ontologically  on  possible  temporalizations  of
temporality.
 

1.  ‘Sein  “Bestand”  gründet  nicht  in  der  Substanzialität  einer  Substanz,  sondern  in  der

“Selbständigkeit” des existierenden Selbst, dessen Sein als Sorge begriffen wurde.’

In this sentence Heidegger has used no less than five words derived from the Indo-European base
‘stā-’  (Cf.  English  ‘stand’,  Latin  ‘stare’, German  ‘stehen’):  ‘Bestand’,  ‘Substanz’,  ‘Substantialität’,
‘Selbständigkeit’, ‘existierenden’. In each case we have used an English equivalent derived from the
same base.

The  important  word  ‘Bestand’,  which  we  have  here  translated  somewhat  arbitrarily  as
‘subsistence’,  and  have  often  handled  elsewhere  in  other  ways,  corresponds  to  the  verb  ‘bestehen’
(‘to subsist’, ‘to remain’, ‘to consist in’, even ‘to exist’ in a broader sense than Heidegger’s). It thus
may  stand  for  ‘subsistence’  in  the  broadest  sense,  or  more  particularly  for  ‘continued  subsistence’;
and  it  may  also  stand  for  that  of  which  something  ‘consists’—its  ‘content’,  the  whole  ‘stock’  of
things of which it consists. This is the sense in which Heidegger most frequently uses it, especially in
such phrases as ‘der phänomenale Bestand’ (‘the phenomenal content’, ‘the stock of phenomena’).

We  have  also  somewhat  arbitrarily  translated  ‘Selbständigkeit’  as  ‘Self-subsistence’,  in
accordance with our translation of the adjective ‘selbständig’ on H. 291-292. But as we shall see later
(H. 322), ‘Self-constancy’ would perhaps be more appropriate.

2. ‘Zeitlichkeit kann sich in verschiedenen Möglichkeiten und in verschiedener Weise zeitigen.’
In ordinary German the verb ‘zeitigen’ means ‘to bring about’ or more strictly, ‘to bring to maturity’;
this is how we have translated it in the earlier portions of this work. In the present section, however,
and  in  those  which  follow,  Heidegger  is  exploiting  the  etymological  connection  of  ‘zeitigen’  with
such  words  as  ‘Zeit’  (‘time’)  and  ‘Zeitlichkeit’  (‘temporality’);  we  have  accordingly  ventured  to
translate  it  as  ‘to  temporalize.’  We  have  already  called  attention  to  earlier  passages  (H.  122,  178)
where ‘zeitigen’ has been changed to ‘zeigen’ in the later editions. If these changes are not simple
misprints, they may indicate a deliberate intention to avoid the use of this verb in any sense but the
special one here introduced. (Contrast H. 152, where no such correction has been made.)

If  the  ascendancy  of  the  falling  understanding  of  Being  (of  Being  as
presence-at-hand)(1) keeps Dasein far from the ontological character of its
own Being, it keeps it still farther from the primordial foundations of that
Being. So one must not be surprised if, at first glance, temporality does not

correspond  to  that  which  is  accessible  to  the  ordinary  understanding  as
‘time’. Thus neither the way time is conceived in our ordinary experience of
it,  nor  the  problematic  which  arises  from  this  experience,  can  function
the  appropriateness  of  an
without  examination  as  a  criterion  for 
Interpretation of time. Rather, we must, in our investigation, make ourselves
familiar beforehand with the primordial phenomenon of temporality, so that
in  terms  of  this  we  may  cast  light  on  the  necessity,  the  source,  and  the
reason for the dominion of the way it is ordinarily understood.

The  primordial  phenomenon  of  temporality  will  be  held  secure  by
demonstrating  that  if  we  have  regard  for  the  possible  totality,  unity,  and
development  of  those  fundamental  structures  of  Dasein  which  we  have
hitherto  exhibited,  these  structures  are  all  to  be  conceived  as  at  bottom
‘temporal’  and  as  modes  of  the  temporalizing  of  temporality.  Thus,  when
temporality  has  been  laid  bare,  there  arises  for  the  existential  analytic  the
task  of  repeating  our  analysis  of  Dasein  in  the  sense  of  Interpreting  its
essential structures with regard to their temporality. The basic directions of
the analyses thus required are prescribed by temporality itself. Accordingly
the chapter will be divided as follows: anticipatory resoluteness as the way
in  which  Dasein’s  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole  has 
existentiell
authenticity(2) (Section 62); the hermeneutical Situation at which we have
arrived  for  Interpreting  the  meaning  of  the  Being  of  care,  and  the
methodological character of the existential analytic in general (Section 63);
care and Selfhood (Section 64); temporality as the ontological meaning of
care  (Section  65);  Dasein’s  temporality  and  the  tasks  arising  therefrom  of
repeating the existential analysis in a primordial manner (Section 66).
 

1. ‘…(Sein als Vorhandenheit)...’ The ‘als’ of the later editions replaces an equality-sign which

we find in the earlier editions.

2. ‘Das existenziell eigentliche Ganzseinkönnen des Daseins als vorlaufende Entschlossenheit.’

62.  Anticipatory  Resoluteness  as 

the  Way 

in  which  Dasein’s

Potentiality-for-Being-a-whole has Existentiell Authenticity
 

H. 305

 

When  resoluteness  has  been  ‘thought  through  to  the  end’  in  a  way
corresponding to its ownmost tendency of Being, to what extent does it lead

us  to  authentic  Being-towards-death?  How  are  we  to  conceive  the
connection between wanting to have a conscience and Dasein’s existentially
projected,  authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole?  Does  welding  these
two together yield a new phenomenon? Or are we left with the resoluteness
which  is  attested  in  its  existentiell  possibility,  and  can  this  resoluteness
undergo  an  existentiell  modalization  through  Being-towards-death?  What
does it mean ‘to think through to the end’ existentially the phenomenon of
resoluteness?

We  have  characterized  resoluteness  as  a  way  of  reticently  projecting
oneself upon one’s ownmost Being-guilty, and exacting anxiety of oneself.
Being-guilty  belongs  to  Dasein’s  Being,  and  signifies  the  null  Being-the-
basis  of  a  nullity.  The  ‘Guilty!’  which  belongs  to  the  Being  of  Dasein  is
something  that  can  be  neither  augmented  nor  diminished.  It  comes  before
any quantification, if the latter has any meaning at all. Moreover, Dasein is
essentially  guilty—not  just  guilty  on  some  occasions,  and  on  other
occasions  not.  Wanting-to-have-a-conscience  resolves  upon  this  Being-
guilty. To project oneself upon this Being-guilty, which Dasein is as long as
it is, belongs  to  the  very  meaning  of  resoluteness.  The  existentiell  way  of
taking  over 
therefore  authentically
in  resoluteness, 
accomplished only when that resoluteness, in its disclosure of Dasein, has
become  so  transparent  that  Being-guilty  is  understood  as  something
constant. But this understanding is made possible only in so far as Dasein
discloses  to  itself  its  potentiality-for-Being,  and  discloses  it  ‘right  to  its
end’.  Existentially,  however,  Dasein’s  “Being-at-an-end”  implies  Being-
towards-the-end.  As  Being-towards-the-end  which  understands—that is  to
say,  as  anticipation  of  death—resoluteness  becomes  authentically  what  it
can be. Resoluteness does not just ‘have’ a connection with anticipation, as
with  something  other  than  itself.  It  harbours  in  itself  authentic  Being-
towards-death, as the possible existentiell modality of its own authenticity.
This ‘connection’ must be elucidated phenomenally.

this  ‘guilt’ 

is 

H. 306

 

By  “resoluteness”  we  mean  “letting  oneself  be  called  forth  to  one’s
ownmost Being-guilty”. Being-guilty belongs to the Being of Dasein itself,
and  we  have  determined  that  this  is  primarily  a  potentiality-for-Being.  To
say  that  Dasein  ‘is’  constantly  guilty  can  only  mean  that  in  every  case

Dasein  maintains  itself  in  this  Being  and  does  so  as  either  authentic  or
inauthentic  existing.  Being-guilty  is  not  just  an  abiding  property  of
something  constantly  present-at-hand,  but  the  existentiell  possibility  of
being authentically  or  inauthentically  guilty.  In  every  case,  the  ‘guilty’  is
only  in  the  current  factical  potentiality-for-Being.  Thus  because  Being-
guilty  belongs  to  the  Being  of  Dasein,  it  must  be  conceived  as  a
potentiality-for-Being-guilty.  Resoluteness  projects 
this
potentiality-for-Being—that  is  to  say,  it  understands  itself  in  it.  This
understanding  maintains  itself,  therefore,  in  a  primordial  possibility  of
Dasein.  It  maintains  itself  authentically  in  it  if  the  resoluteness  is
primordially that which it tends to be. But we have revealed that Dasein’s
primordial Being towards its potentiality-for-Being is Being-towards-death
—that  is  to  say,  towards  that  distinctive  possibility  of  Dasein  which  we
have  already  characterized.  Anticipation  discloses  this  possibility  as
possibility.  Thus  only  as  anticipating  does  resoluteness  become  a
primordial  Being  towards  Dasein’s  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.  Only
when 
itself  as  Being-towards-death  does  resoluteness
understand the ‘can’ of its potentiality-for-Being-guilty.(1)
 

it  ‘qualifies’ 

itself  upon 

1.  ‘Das  “kann”  des  Schuldigseinkönnens  versteht  die  Entschlossenheit  erst,  wenn  sie  sich  als

Sein zum Tode “qualifiziert”.’

When Dasein is  resolute, it takes over authentically  in  its existence the
fact  that  it  is  the  null  basis  of  its  own  nullity.  We  have  conceived  death
existentially  as  what  we  have  characterized  as  the  possibility  of  the
impossibility  of  existence—that  is  to  say,  as  the  utter  nullity  of  Dasein.
Death  is  not  “added  on”  to  Dasein  at  its  ‘end’;  but  Dasein,  as  care,  is  the
thrown  (that  is,  null)  basis  for  its  death.  The  nullity  by  which  Dasein’s
Being is dominated primordially through and through, is revealed to Dasein
itself in authentic Being-towards-death. Only on the basis of Dasein’s whole
Being does anticipation make Being-guilty manifest. Care harbours in itself
both  death  and  guilt  equiprimordially.  Only  in  anticipatory  resoluteness  is
the potentiality-for-Being-guilty understood authentically and wholly—that
is to say, primordially.(ii)
 

ii. The Being-guilty which belongs primordially to Dasein’s state of Being, must be distinguished
from  the  status  corruptionis  as  understood  in  theology.  Theology  can  find  in  Being-guilty,  as
existentially defined, an ontological condition for the factical possibility of such a status. The  guilt
which is included in the idea of this status, is a factical indebtedness of an utterly peculiar kind. It has

its  own  attestation,  which  remains  closed  off  in  principle  from  any  philosophical  experience.  The
existential analysis of Being-guilty, proves nothing either for or against the possibility of sin. Taken
strictly, it cannot even be said that the ontology of Dasein of itself leaves this possibility open; for this
ontology, as a philosophical inquiry, ‘knows’ in principle nothing about sin.

H. 307

 

When  the  call  of  conscience  is  understood,  lostness  in  the  “they”  is
revealed. Resoluteness brings Dasein back to its ownmost potentiality-for-
Being-its-Self.  When  one  has  an  understanding  Being-towards-death—
towards  death  as  one’s  ownmost  possibility—one’s  potentiality-for-Being
becomes authentic and wholly transparent.

The  call  of  conscience  passes  over  in  its  appeal  all  Dasein’s  ‘worldly’
prestige and potentialities. Relentlessly it individualizes Dasein down to its
potentiality-for-Being-guilty,  and  exacts  of  it  that  it  should  be  this
potentiality  authentically.  The  unwavering  precision  with  which  Dasein  is
thus essentially individualized down to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being,
discloses  the  anticipation  of  [zum]  death  as  the  possibility  which  is  non-
relational.  Anticipatory  resoluteness  lets  the  potentiality-for-Being-guilty,
as  one’s  ownmost  non-relational  possibility,  be  struck  wholly  into  the
conscience.

Any  factical  Dasein  has  been  determined  by  its  ownmost  Being-guilty
both before any factical indebtedness has been incurred and after any such
indebtedness has been paid off; and wanting-to-have-a-conscience signifies
that  one  is  ready  for  the  appeal  to  this  ownmost  Being-guilty.  This  prior
Being-guilty,  which 
itself
unconcealedly  in  its  character  as  prior  until  this  very  priority  has  been
enlisted  in  [hineingestellt]  that  possibility  which  is  simply  not  to  be
outstripped. When,  in  anticipation,  resoluteness  has  caught  up  [eingeholt]
the  possibility  of  death  into  its  potentiality-for-Being,  Dasein’s  authentic
existence can no longer be outstripped [überholt] by anything.

is  constantly  with  us,  does  not  show 

H. 308

 

The  phenomenon  of  resoluteness  has  brought  us  before  the  primordial
truth  of  existence.  As  resolute,  Dasein  is  revealed  to  itself  in  its  current
factical  potentiality-for-Being,  and  in  such  a  way  that  Dasein  itself  is this
revealing and Being-revealed. To any truth, there belongs a corresponding

holding-for-true.  The  explicit  appropriating  of  what  has  been  disclosed  or
discovered is Being-certain. The primordial  truth  of existence demands an
equiprimordial  Being-certain,  in  which  one  maintains  oneself  in  what
resoluteness  discloses.  It(1)  gives  itself  the  current  factical  Situation,  and
brings  itself  into  that  Situation.  The  Situation  cannot  be  calculated  in
advance  or  presented  like  something  present-at-hand  which  is  waiting  for
someone to grasp it. It merely gets disclosed in a free resolving which has
not  been  determined  beforehand  but  is  open  to  the  possibility  of  such
determination.  What,  then,  does  the  certainty  which  belongs  to  such
resoluteness  signify?  Such  certainty  must  maintain  itself  in  what  is
disclosed  by  the  resolution.  But  this  means  that  it  simply  cannot  become
rigid as  regards  the  Situation,  but  must  understand  that  the  resolution,  in
accordance  with  its  own  meaning  as  a  disclosure,  must  be  held open  and
free  for  the  current  factical  possibility.  The  certainty  of  the  resolution
signifies that one holds oneself free for the possibility of taking it back—a
possibility which is factically necessary.(2) However, such holding-for-true
in resoluteness (as the truth of existence) by no means lets us fall back into
irresoluteness. On the contrary, this holding-for-true, as a resolute holding-
oneself-free  for  taking  back,  is  authentic  resoluteness  which  resolves  to
keep repeating itself.(3) Thus, in an existentiell manner, one’s very lostness
in  irresoluteness  gets  undermined.  The  holding-for-true  which  belongs  to
resoluteness,  tends,  in  accordance  with  its  meaning,  to  hold  itself  free
constantly—that is,  to  hold  itself  free  for  Dasein’s  whole  potentiality-for-
Being. This constant certainty is guaranteed to resoluteness only so that it
will relate itself to that possibility of which it can be utterly certain.  In its
death,  Dasein  must  simply  ‘take  back’  everything.  Since  resoluteness  is
constantly  certain  of  death—in  other  words,  since  it  anticipates  it—
resoluteness thus attains a certainty which is authentic and whole.
 

1. Heidegger’s ambiguous pronoun refers to ‘resoluteness’, as is clear from H. 326 below.
2. ‘Die Gewissheit des Entschlusses bedeutet: Sichfreihalten für seine  mögliche und je faktisch
notwendige  Zurücknahme.’  It  is  not  grammatically  clear  whether  the  possessive  adjective  ‘seine’
refers back to ‘Entschlusses’ (‘resolution’) or to the ‘Sich-’ of ‘Sichfreihalten’ (‘oneself’).  We  have
chosen the former interpretation as somewhat more natural. But it is tempting to construe this and the
following sentence as preparing the way for Heidegger s remark a few lines below that ‘In seinem
Tod muss sich das Dasein schlechthin “zurücknehmen” ’—which might be translated as ‘In its death,
Dasein  must  ‘withdraw’  itself  utterly.’  In  that  case  it  would  be  attractive  to  translate  the  present
sentence by writing ‘…holds oneself free for one’s own withdrawal…’

3.  ‘…eigentliche  Entschlossenheit  zur  Wiederholung  ihrer  selbst.’  The  idea  seems  to  be  that
authentic resoluteness keeps reiterating itself in the face of a constant awareness that it may have to

be retracted or taken back at any time.

But Dasein is equiprimordially in the untruth. Anticipatory resoluteness
gives  Dasein  at  the  same  time  the  primordial  certainty  that  it  has  been
closed  off.  In  anticipatory  resoluteness,  Dasein  holds  itself  open  for  its
constant  lostness  in  the  irresoluteness  of  the  “they”—a  lostness  which  is
possible from the very basis of its own Being. As a constant possibility of
Dasein,  irresoluteness  is  co-certain.  When  resoluteness  is  transparent  to
itself, it understands that the indefiniteness of one’s potentiality-for-Being is
made definite only in a resolution as regards the current Situation. It knows
about the indefiniteness by which an entity that exists is dominated through
and through. But if this knowing is to correspond to authentic resoluteness,
it must itself arise from an authentic disclosure. The indefiniteness of one’s
own potentiality-for-Being, even when this potentiality has become certain
in  a  resolution,  is  first  made  wholly  manifest  in  Being-towards-death.
Anticipation  brings  Dasein  face  to  face  with  a  possibility  which  is
constantly certain but which at any moment remains indefinite as to when
that possibility will become an impossibility. Anticipation makes it manifest
that  this  entity  has  been  thrown  into  the  indefiniteness  of  its  ‘limit-
Situation’;  when  resolved  upon  the  latter,  Dasein  gains  its  authentic
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole.  The  indefiniteness  of  death  is  primordially
disclosed 
to  exact
resoluteness  of  itself.  It  moves  out  of  the  way  everything  which  conceals
the fact that Dasein has been abandoned to itself. The “nothing” with which
anxiety  brings  us  face  to  face,  unveils  the  nullity  by  which  Dasein,  in  its
very basis, is defined; and this basis itself  i s  as thrownness into death.

this  primordial  anxiety  strives 

in  anxiety.  But 

H. 309

 

Our  analysis  has  revealed seriatim those items  of  modalization towards
which  resoluteness  tends  of  itself  and  which  arise  from  authentic  Being
towards  death  as  that  possibility  which  is  one’s  ownmost,  non-relational,
not  to  be  outstripped,  certain,  and  yet  indefinite.  Resoluteness  is
authentically and wholly what it can be, only as anticipatory resoluteness.

But on the other hand, in our Interpretation of the ‘connection’ between
resoluteness  and  anticipation,  we  have  first  reached  a  full  existential
understanding of anticipation itself. Hitherto this could amount to no more

than an ontological projection. We have now shown that anticipation is not
just a fictitious possibility which we have forced upon Dasein; it is a mode
of  an  existentiell  potentiality-for-Being  that  is  attested  in  Dasein—a  mode
which Dasein exacts of itself, if indeed it authentically understands itself as
resolute.  Anticipation  ‘is’  not  some  kind  of  free-floating  behaviour,  but
must be conceived as the possibility of the authenticity of that resoluteness
which has been attested in an existentiell way—a possibility hidden in such
resoluteness, and thus attested therewith. Authentic  ‘thinking  about  death’
is a wanting-to-have-a-conscience, which has become transparent to itself in
an existentiell manner. If resoluteness, as authentic, tends towards the mode
delimited  by  anticipation,  and  if  anticipation  goes  to  make  up  Dasein’s
authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole,  then  in  the  resoluteness  which  is
attested  in  an  existentiell  manner,  there  is  attested  with  it  an  authentic
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole  which  belongs  to  Dasein.  The  question  of
the  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole  is  one  which  is  factical  and  existentiell.
It is answered by Dasein as resolute. The question of Dasein’s potentiality-
for-Being-a-whole has now fully sloughed off the character indicated at the
beginning,(iii)  when  we  treated  it  as  it  if  were  just  a  theoretical  or
methodological  question  of  the  analytic  of  Dasein,  arising  from  the
endeavour to have the whole of Dasein completely ‘given’. The question of
Dasein’s totality, which at the beginning we discussed only with regard to
ontological  method,  has  its  justification,  but  only  because  the  ground  for
that justification goes back to an ontical possibility of Dasein.

By  thus  casting  light  upon  the  ‘connection’  between  anticipation  and
resoluteness  in  the  sense  of  the  possible  modalization  of  the  latter  by  the
former,  we  have  exhibited  as  a  phenomenon  an  authentic  potentiality-for-
Being-a-whole which belongs to Dasein. If with this phenomenon we have
reached a way of Being of Dasein in which it brings itself to itself and face
to  face  with  itself,  then  this  phenomenon  must,  both  ontically  and
ontologically, remain unintelligible to the everyday common-sense manner
in which Dasein has been interpreted by the “they”. It would be 
a misunderstanding to shove this existentiell possibility aside as ‘unproved’
or  to  want  to  ‘prove’  it  theoretically.  Yet  the  phenomenon  needs  to  be
protected against the grossest perversions.
 

iii. Cf. Section 45, H. 231 ff.

H. 310

 

Anticipatory  resoluteness  is  not  a  way  of  escape,  fabricated  for  the
‘overcoming’ of death; it is rather that understanding which follows the call
of conscience and which frees for death the possibility of acquiring power
over  Dasein’s  existence  and  of  basically  dispersing  all  fugitive  Self-
concealments.  Nor  does  wanting-to-have-a-conscience,  which  has  been
made  determinate  as  Being-towards-death,  signify  a  kind  of  seclusion  in
which  one  flees  the  world;  rather,  it  brings  one  without  Illusions  into  the
resoluteness of ‘taking action’. Neither does anticipatory resoluteness stem
from  ‘idealistic’  exactions  soaring  above  existence  and  its  possibilities;  it
springs  from  a  sober  understanding  of  what  are  factically  the  basic
possibilities for Dasein. Along with the sober anxiety which brings us face
to  face  with  our  individualized  potentiality-for-Being,  there  goes  an
unshakable  joy  in  this  possibility.  In  it  Dasein  becomes  free  from  the
entertaining ‘incidentals’ with which busy curiosity keeps providing itself—
primarily  from  the  events  of  the  world.(1)  But  the  analysis  of  these  basic
moods  would  transgress  the  limits  which  we  have  drawn  for  the  present
Interpretation by aiming towards fundamental ontology.
 

1.  ‘In  ihr  wird  das  Dasein  frei  von  den  “Zufälligkeiten”  des  Unterhaltenwerdens  die  sich  die

geschäftige Neugier primär aus den Weltbegebenheiten verschafft.’

Is  there  not,  however,  a  definite  ontical  way  of  taking  authentic
existence,  a  factical 
ideal  of  Dasein,  underlying  our  ontological
Interpretation of Dasein’s existence? That is so indeed. But not only is this
Fact  one  which  must  not  be  denied  and  which  we  are  forced  to  grant;  it
must also be conceived in its positive necessity, in terms of the object which
we have taken as the theme of our investigation. Philosophy will never seek
to  deny  its  ‘presuppositions’,  but  neither  may  it  simply  admit  them.  It
conceives  them,  and  it  unfolds  with  more  and  more  penetration  both  the
presuppositions themselves and that for which they are presuppositions. The
methodological  considerations  now  demanded  of  us  will  have  this  very
function.

63.  The  Hermeneutical  Situation  at  which  we  have  Arrived  for
Interpreting the  Meaning  of the  Being of Care; and  the  Methodological
Character of the Existential Analytic in General
 

‘Die für eine Interpretation des Seinssinnes der Sorge gewonnene hermeneutische Situation und

der methodische Charakter der existenzialen Analytik überhaupt.’

 

 

H. 311

In 

its  anticipatory 

resoluteness,  Dasein  has  now  been  made
phenomenally  visible  with  regard  to  its  possible  authenticity  and  totality.
The  hermeneutical  Situation(iv)  which  was  previously  inadequate  for
interpreting  the  meaning  of  the  Being  of  care,  now  has  the  required
primordiality. Dasein has been put into that which we have in advance, and
this  has  been  done  primordially—that  is  to  say,  this  has  been  done  with
regard to its authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole; the idea of existence,
which guides us as that which we see in advance, has been made definite by
the  clarification  of  our  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being;  and,  now  that  we
have  concretely  worked  out  the  structure  of  Dasein’s  Being,  its  peculiar
ontological  character  has  become  so  plain  as  compared  with  everything
present-at-hand,  that  Dasein’s  existentiality  has  been  grasped  in  advance
with  sufficient  Articulation  to  give  sure  guidance  for  working  out  the
existentialia conceptually.

The way which we have so far pursued in the analytic of Dasein has led
us to a concrete demonstration of the thesis(v) which was put forward just
casually at the beginning—that the entity which in every case we ourselves
are, is ontologically that which is farthest. The  reason  for  this  lies  in  care
itself.  Our  Being  alongside  the  things  with  which  we  concern  ourselves
most closely in the ‘world’—a Being which is falling—guides the everyday
way  in  which  Dasein  is  interpreted,  and  covers  up  ontically  Dasein’s
authentic Being, so that the ontology which is directed towards this entity is
denied  an  appropriate  basis.  Therefore  the  primordial  way  in  which  this
entity  is  presented  as  a  phenomenon  is  anything  but  obvious,  if  even
ontology  proximally  follows  the  course  of  the  everyday  interpretation  of
Dasein.  The  laying-bare  of  Dasein’s  primordial  Being  must  rather  be

wrested from  Dasein  by  following  the  opposite  course from  that  taken  by
the falling ontico-ontological tendency of interpretation.

Not  only  in  exhibiting  the  most  elemental  structures  of  Being-in-the-
world,  in  delimiting  the  concept  of  the  world,  in  clarifying  the  average
“who”  of  this  entity  (the  “who”  which  is  closest  to  us—the  they-self),  in
Interpreting  the  ‘there’,  but  also,  above  all,  in  analysing  care,  death,
conscience,  and  guilt—in  all  these  ways  we  have  shown  how  in  Dasein
itself concernful common sense has taken control of Dasein’s potentiality-
for-Being and the disclosure of that potentiality—that is to say, the closing
of it off.
 

iv. Cf. Section 45, H. 232.
v. Cf. Section 5, H. 15

H. 312

 

Dasein’s kind of Being thus demands that  any  ontological  Interpretation
which sets itself the goal of exhibiting the phenomena in their primordiality,
should capture the Being of this entity, in spite of this entity’s own tendency
to  cover  things  up.  Existential  analysis,  therefore,  constantly  has  the
character  of doing  violence  [Gewaltsamkeit], whether  to  the  claims  of  the
everyday  interpretation,  or  to  its  complacency  and  its  tranquillized
obviousness. While indeed this characteristic is specially distinctive of the
ontology  of  Dasein,  it  belongs  properly  to  any  Interpretation,  because  the
understanding  which  develops  in  Interpretation  has  the  structure  of  a
projection. But is not anything of this sort guided and regulated in a way of
its  own?  Where  are  ontological  projects  to  get  the  evidence  that  their
‘findings’  are  phenomenally  appropriate?  Ontological  Interpretation
projects the entity presented to it upon the Being which is that entity’s own,
so as to conceptualize it with regard to its structure. Where are the signposts
to direct the projection, so that Being will be reached at all? And what it the
entity which becomes the theme of the existential analytic, hides the Being
that  belongs  to  it,  and  does  so  in its  very  way  of  being?  To  answer  these
questions  we  must  first  restrict  ourselves  to  clarifying  the  analytic  of
Dasein, as the questions themselves demand.

The  interpretation  of  the  Self  belongs  to  Dasein’s  Being.  In  the
circumspective-concernful discovering of the ‘world’, concern gets sighted

too.  Dasein  always  understands  itself  factically  in  definite  existentiell
possibilities,  even  if  its  projects  stem  only  from  the  common  sense  of  the
“they”. Whether explicitly or not, whether appropriately or not, existence is
somehow  understood  too.  There  are  some  things  which  every  ontical
understanding ‘includes’, even if these are only pre-ontological—that  is  to
say, not conceived theoretically or thematically. Every ontologically explicit
question  about  Dasein’s  Being  has  had  the  way  already  prepared  for  it  by
the kind of Being which Dasein has.

those  existentiell  possibilities  with  which 

Yet where are we to find out what makes up the ‘authentic’ existence of
Dasein?  Unless  we  have  an  existentiell  understanding,  all  analysis  of
existentiality will remain groundless. Is it not the case that underlying our
Interpretation  of  the  authenticity  and  totality  of  Dasein,  there  is  an  ontical
way of taking existence which may be possible but need not be binding for
everyone?  Existential  Interpretation  will  never  seek  to  take  over  any
authoritarian pronouncement as to those things which, from an existentiell
point of view, are possible or binding. But must it not justify itself in regard
to 
it  gives  ontological
Interpretation  its  ontical  basis?  If  the  Being  of  Dasein  is  essentially
potentiality-for-Being,  if  it  is  Being-free  for  its  ownmost  possibilities,  and
if, in every case, it exists only in freedom for these possibilities or in lack of
freedom for them, can ontological Interpretation do anything else than base
itself  on ontical  possibilities—ways of  potentiality-for-Being—and  project
these  possibilities  upon  their  ontological  possibility? And  if,  for  the  most
part, Dasein interprets itself in terms of its lostness in concerning itself with
the ‘world’, does not the appropriate way of disclosure for such an entity lie
in  determining  the  ontico-existentiell  possibilities  (and  doing  so  in  the
manner which we have achieved by following the opposite course) and then
providing an existential analysis grounded upon these possibilities? In  that
case,  will  not  the  violence  of  this  projection  amount  to  freeing  Dasein’s
undisguised phenomenal content?

H. 313

 

It  may  be  that  our  method  demands  this  ‘violent’  presentation  of
possibilities  of  existence,  but  can  such  a  presentation  be  taken  out  of  the
province  of  our  free  discretion?  If  the  analytic  makes  anticipatory
resoluteness  basic  as  a  potentiality-for-Being  which,  in  an  existentiell

manner, is authentic—a possibility to which Dasein itself summons us from
the very basis of its existence—then is this possibility just one which is left
to  our  discretion?  Has  that  way-of-Being  in  accordance  with  which
Dasein’s  potentiality-for-Being  comports  itself  towards  its  distinctive
possibility—death—been  just  accidentally  pounced  upon?  Does  Being-in-
the-world have a higher instance for its potentiality-for-Being than its own
death?(1)

Even  if  the  ontico-ontological  projection  of  Dasein  upon  an  authentic
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole may not be just something that is left to our
discretion,  does  this  already  justify  the  existential  Interpretation  we  have
given  for  this  phenomenon?  Where  does  this  Interpretation  get  its  clue,  if
not  from  an  idea  of  existence  in  general  which  has  been  ‘presupposed’?
How  have  the  steps  in  the  analysis  of  inauthentic  everydayness  been
regulated, if not by the concept of existence which we have posited? And if
we  say  that  Dasein  ‘falls’,  and  that  therefore  the  authenticity  of  its
potentiality-for-Being must be wrested from Dasein in spite of this tendency
of  its  Being,(2)  from  what  point  of  view  is  this  spoken?  Is  not  everything
already illumined by the light of the ‘presupposed’ idea of existence, even if
rather  dimly?  Where  does  this  idea  get  its  justification?  Has  our  initial
projection, in which we called attention to it, led us nowhere? By no means.
 

1. ‘Hat das In-der-Welt-sein eine höhere Instanz seines Seinkönnens als seinen Tod?’
2.  ‘…und  deshalb  sei  ihm  die  Eigentlichkeit  des  Seinkönnens  gegen  diese  Seinstendenz
abzuringen...’ This of course does not mean that this authenticity is to be taken away from Dasein; it
means that because such authenticity runs counter to Dasein’s tendency to fall, Dasein must make a
very real effort to achieve it, or perhaps rather that our Interpretation calls for a similar effort if this
authenticity is to be properly discerned.

In  indicating  the  formal  aspects  of  the  idea  of  existence  we  have  been
guided  by  the  understanding-of-Being  which  lies  in  Dasein  itself.  Without
any ontological transparency, it has nevertheless been revealed that in every
case  I  am  myself  the  entity  which  we  call  Dasein,  and  that  I  am  so  as  a
potentiality-for-Being  for  which  to  be  this  entity  is  an  issue.  Dasein
understands itself as Being-in-the-world, even if it does so without adequate
ontological  definiteness.  Being  thus,  it  encounters  entities  which  have  the
kind of Being of what is ready-to-hand and present-at-hand. No matter how
far removed from an ontological concept the distinction between existence
and  Reality  may  be,  no  matter  even  if  Dasein  proximally  understands
existence  as  Reality,  Dasein  is  not  just  present-at-hand  but  has  already

understood  itself, however  mythical  or  magical  the  interpretation  which  it
gives  may  be.  For  otherwise,  Dasein  would  never  ‘live’  in  a  myth  and
would not be concerned with magic in ritual and cult. The idea of existence
which  we  have  posited  gives  us  an  outline  of  the  formal  structure  of  the
understanding of Dasein and does so in a way which is not binding from an
existentiell point of view.

H. 314

 

Under  the  guidance  of  this  idea  the  preparatory  analysis  of  the
everydayness  that  lies  closest  to  us  has  been  carried  out  as  far  as  the  first
conceptual definition  of  “care”.  This  latter  phenomenon  has  enabled  us  to
get  a  more  precise  grasp  of  existence  and  of  its  relations  to  facticity  and
falling. And defining the structure of care has given us a basis on which to
distinguish  ontologically  between  existence  and  Reality  for  the  first  time.
(vi) This has led us to the thesis that the substance of man is existence.(vii)

Yet even in this formal idea of existence, which is not binding upon us in
an  existentiell  way,  there  already  lurks  a  definite  though  unpretentious
ontological  ‘content’,  which—like  the  idea  of  Reality,  which  has  been
distinguished  from  this—‘presupposes’  an  idea  of  Being  in  general.  Only
within  the  horizon  of  this  idea  of  Being  can  the  distinction  between
existence  and  Reality  be  accomplished.  Surely,  in  both  of  them  what  we
have in view is Being.

But  if  we  are  to  obtain  an  ontologically  clarified  idea  of  Being  in
general, must we not do so by first working out that understanding-of-Being
which  belongs  to  Dasein?  This  understanding,  however,  is  to  be  grasped
primordially  only  on  the  basis  of  a  primordial  Interpretation  of  Dasein,  in
which  we  take  the  idea  of  existence  as  our  clue.  Does  it  not  then  become
altogether  patent  in  the  end  that  this  problem  of  fundamental  ontology
which we have broached, is one which moves in a ‘circle’?
 

vi. Cf. Section 43, H. 200 ff.
vii. Cf. H. 212 and H. 117.

H. 315

 

We  have 

in  analysing 

indeed  already  shown, 

the  structure  of
understanding  in  general,  that  what  gets  censured  inappropriately  as  a
‘circle’,  belongs  to  the  essence  and  to  the  distinctive  character  of
understanding  as  such.(viii)  In  spite  of  this,  if  the  problematic  of
fundamental  ontology  is  to  have  its  hermeneutical  Situation  clarified,  our
investigation  must  now  come  back  explicitly  to  this  ‘circular  argument’.
When it is objected that the existential Interpretation is ‘circular’, it is said
that  we  have  ‘presupposed’  the  idea  of  existence  and  of  Being  in  general,
and  that  Dasein  gets  Interpreted  ‘accordingly’,  so  that  the  idea  of  Being
may  be  obtained  from  it.  But  what  does  ‘presupposition’  signify?  In
positing  the  idea  of  existence,  do  we  also  posit  some  proposition  from
which  we  deduce  further  propositions  about  the  Being  of  Dasein,  in
accordance  with  formal  rules  of  consistency?  Or  does  this  pre-supposing
have the character of an understanding projection, in such a manner indeed
that the Interpretation by which such an understanding gets developed, will
let that which is to be interpreted put itself into words for the very first time,
so that it may decide of its own accord whether, as the entity which it is, it
has that state of Being for which it has been disclosed in the projection with
regard  to  its  formal  aspects?(1) Is  there  any  other  way  at  all  by  which  an
entity  can  put  itself  into  words  with  regard  to  its  Being?  We  cannot  ever
‘avoid’  a  ‘circular’  proof  in  the  existential  analytic,  because  such  an
analytic  does  not  do  any  proving  at  all  by  the  rules  of  the  ‘logic  of
consistency’.  What  common  sense  wishes  to  eliminate  in  avoiding  the
‘circle’,  on  the  supposition  that  it  is  measuring  up  to  the  loftiest  rigour  of
scientific  investigation,  is  nothing  less  than  the  basic  structure  of  care.
Because it is primordially constituted by care, any Dasein is already ahead
of itself. As being, it has in every case already projected itself upon definite
possibilities of its existence; and in such existentiell projections it has, in a
pre-ontological manner, also projected something like existence and Being.
Like  all  research, the  research  which  wants  to  develop  and  conceptualize
that  kind  of  Being  which  belongs  to  existence,  is  itself  a  kind  of  Being
which  disclosive  Dasein  possesses;  can  such  research  be  denied  this
projecting which is essential to Dasein?
 

viii. Cf. Section 32, H. 152 ff.

 

1. ‘Oder hat dieses Voraus-setzen den Charakter des verstehenden Entwerfens, so zwar, dass die
solches Verstehen ausbildende Interpretation das Auszulegende gerade erst selbst zu Wort kommen

lässt,  damit  es  von  sich  aus  entscheide,  ob  es  als  dieses  Seiende  die  Seinsverfassung  hergibt,  auf
welche es im Entwurf formalanzeigend erschlossen wurde?’ Here, however, Heidegger may be using
the verb ‘erschliessen’ in the sense of ‘infer’, in spite of his remarks on H. 75 above (see our note 1
ad loc.) and ‘Entwurf’ in the sense of ‘sketch’.

Yet the ‘charge of circularity’ itself comes from a kind of Being which
belongs  to  Dasein.  Something  like  a  projection,  even  an  ontological  one,
still  remains  for  the  common  sense  of  our  concernful  absorption  in  the
“they”;  but  it  necessarily  seems  strange  to  us,  because  common  sense
barricades  itself  against  it  ‘on  principle’.  Common  sense  concerns  itself,
whether  ‘theoretically’  or  ‘practically’,  only  with  entities  which  can  be
surveyed at a glance circumspectively. What is distinctive in common sense
is that it has in view only the experiencing of ‘factual’ entities, in order that
it may be able to rid itself of an understanding of Being. It fails to recognize
that  entities  can  be  experienced  ‘factually’  only  when  Being  is  already
understood,  even  if  it  has  not  been  conceptualized.  Common  sense
misunderstands  understanding.  And 
therefore  common  sense  must
necessarily  pass  off  as  ‘violent’  anything  that  lies  beyond  the  reach  of  its
understanding, or any attempt to go out so far.

H. 316

 

When one talks of the ‘circle’ in understanding, one expresses a failure
to  recognize  two  things:  (1) that  understanding  as  such  makes  up  a  basic
kind  of  Dasein’s  Being,  and  (2) that  this  Being  is  constituted  as  care.  To
deny the circle, to make a secret of it, or even to want to overcome it, means
finally  to  reinforce  this  failure.  We  must  rather  endeavour  to  leap  into  the
‘circle’, primordially and wholly, so that even at the start of the analysis of
Dasein we make sure that we have a full view of Dasein’s circular Being. If,
in the ontology of Dasein, we ‘take our departure’ from a worldless “I” in
order  to  provide  this  “I”  with  an  Object  and  an  ontologically  baseless
relation  to  that  Object,  then  we  have  ‘presupposed’  not  too  much,  but  too
little. If we make a problem of ‘life’, and then just occasionally have regard
for death too, our view is too short-sighted. The object we have taken as our
theme is artificially and dogmatically curtailed if ‘in the first instance’ we
restrict ourselves to a ‘theoretical subject’, in order that we may then round
it out ‘on the practical side’ by tacking on an ‘ethic’.

This may suffice to clarify the existential meaning of the hermeneutical
Situation  of  a  primordial  analytic  of  Dasein.  By  exhibiting  anticipatory
resoluteness, we have brought Dasein before us with regard to its authentic
totality,  so  that  we  now  have  it  in  advance.  The  authenticity  of  the
potentiality-for-Being-one’s-Self guarantees that primordial existentiality is
something  we  see  in  advance,  and  this  assures  us  that  we  are  coining  the
appropriate existential concepts.(1)

At the same time our analysis of anticipatory resoluteness has led us to
the phenomenon of primordial and authentic truth. We have shown earlier
how  that  understanding-of-Being  which  prevails  proximally  and  for  the
most part, conceives Being in the sense of presence-at-hand, and so covers
up  the  primordial  phenomenon  of  truth.(ix)  If,  however,  ‘there  is’  Being
only  in  so  far  as  truth  ‘is’,  and  if  the  understanding  of  Being  varies
according to the kind of truth, then truth which is primordial and authentic
must  guarantee  the  understanding  of  the  Being  of  Dasein  and  of  Being  in
general.  The  ontological  ‘truth’  of  the  existential  analysis  is  developed  on
the ground of the primordial existentiell truth. However, the latter does not
necessarily need the former. The most primordial and basic existential truth,
for which the problematic of fundamental ontology strives in preparing for
the question of Being in general, is the disclosedness of the meaning of the
Being  of  care.  In  order  to  lay  bare  this  meaning,  we  need  to  hold  in
readiness, undiminished, the full structural content of care.
 

ix. Cf. Section 44b, H. 219 ff.

64. Care and Selfhood

 

 

H. 317

Through  the  unity  of  the  items  which  are  constitutive  for  care—
existentiality,  facticity,  and  fallenness—it  has  become  possible  to  give  the
first ontological definition for the totality of Dasein’s structural whole. We
have  given  an  existential  formula  for  the  structure  of  care  as  “ahead-of-
itself—Being-already-in (a world) as Being-alongside (entities encountered
within-the-world)”.(2)  We  have  seen  that  the  care-structure  does  not  first
arise  from  a  coupling  together,  but  is  articulated  all  the  same.(x)  In

assessing  this  ontological  result,  we  have  had  to  estimate  how  well  it
satisfies the requirements for a primordial Interpretation of Dasein.(xi) The
upshot of these considerations has been that neither the whole of Dasein nor
its  authentic  potentiality-for-Being  has  ever  been  made  a  theme.  The
structure of care, however, seems to be precisely where the attempt to grasp
the whole of Dasein as a phenomenon has foundered. The “ahead-of-itself”
presented  itself  as  a  “not-yet”.  But  when  the  “ahead-of-itself”  which  had
been  characterized  as  something  still  outstanding,  was  considered  in
genuinely existential manner, it revealed itself as Being-towards-the-end—
something  which,  in  the  depths  of  its  Being,  every  Dasein  is.  We  made  it
plain at the same time that in the call of conscience care summons Dasein
towards  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.  When  we  came  to  understand
in  a  primordial  manner  how  this  appeal  is  understood,  we  saw  that  the
understanding  of  it  manifests  itself  as  anticipatory  resoluteness,  which
includes  an  authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole—a  potentiality  of
Dasein.  Thus  the  care-structure  does  not  speak  against  the  possibility  of
Being-a-whole but is the condition for the possibility of such an existentiell
potentiality-for-Being. In the course of these analyses, it became plain that
the  existential  phenomena  of  death,  conscience,  and  guilt  are  anchored  in
the  phenomenon  of  care.  The  totality  of  the  structural  whole  has  become
even more richly articulated; and because of this, the existential question of
the unity of this totality has become still more urgent.
 

x. Cf. Section 41, H. 191 ff.
xi. Cf. Section 45, H. 231 ff.

1.  ‘Die  Eigentlichkeit  des  Selbstseinkönnens  verbürgt  die  Vor-sicht  auf  die  ursprüngliche
Existenzialität,  und  diese  sichert  die  Prägung  der  angemessenen  existenzialen  Begrifflichkeit.’  The
ambiguity of our ‘this’ reflects a similar ambiguity in Heidegger’s ‘diese’, which may refer either to
‘die Vor-sicht’ or to ‘die ursprüngliche Existenzialität’.

2. ‘Sich-vorweg—schon-sein-in (einer Welt) als Sein-bei (innerweltlich begegnenden Seienden)’.
Here we follow the earlier editions. In the later editions there is a hyphen instead of a dash between
‘vorweg’ and ‘schon’.

 

 

H. 318

How are we to conceive this unity? How can Dasein exist as a unity in
the  ways  and  possibilities  of  its  Being  which  we  have  mentioned?
Manifestly, it can so exist only in such a way that it is itself this Being in its

essential  possibilities—that  in  each  case I am  this  entity.  The  ‘I’  seems  to
‘hold together’ the totality of the structural whole. In the ‘ontology’ of this
entity, the ‘I’ and the ‘Self’ have been conceived from the earliest times as
the  supporting  ground  (as  substance  or  subject).  Even  in  its  preparatory
characterization of everydayness, our analytic has already come up against
the question of Dasein’s “who”. It has been shown that proximally and for
the  most  part  Dasein  is  not  itself  but  is  lost  in  the  they-self  which  is  an
existentiell  modification  of  the  authentic  Self.  The  question  of  the
ontological constitution of Selfhood has remained unanswered. In principle,
of course, we have already fixed upon a clue for this problem;(xii) for if the
Self  belongs  to  the  essential  [wesenhaften]  attributes  of  Dasein,  while
Dasein’s ‘Essence’ [“Essenz”] lies in existence, then “I”-hood and Selfhood
must  be  conceived  existentially.  On  the  negative  side,  it  has  also  been
shown that our ontological characterization of the “they” prohibits us from
making any use of categories of presence-at-hand (such as substance). It has
become clear, in principle, that ontologically care is not to be derived from
Reality  or  to  be  built  up  with  the  categories  of  Reality.(xiii)  Care  already
harbours in itself the phenomenon of the Self, if indeed the thesis is correct
that the expression ‘care for oneself’ [“Selbstsorge”], would be tautological
if  it  were  proposed  in  conformity  with  the  term  “solicitude”  [Fürsorge]  as
care for Others.(xiv) But in that case the problem of defining ontologically
the  Selfhood  of  Dasein  gets  sharpened  to  the  question  of  the  existential
‘connection’ between care and Selfhood.

To clarify the existentiality of the Self, we take as our ‘natural’ point of
departure  Dasein’s  everyday  interpretation  of  the  Self.  In  saying  “I”,
Dasein  expresses  itself  about  ‘itself’.  It  is  not  necessary  that  in  doing  so
Dasein  should  make  any  utterance.  With  the  ‘I’,  this  entity  has  itself  in
view.  The  content  of  this  expression  is  regarded  as  something  utterly
simple. In each case, it just stands for me and nothing further. Also, this ‘I’,
as  something  simple,  is  not  an  attribute  of  other  Things;  it  is  not  itself  a
predicate,  but  the  absolute  ‘subject’.  What  is  expressed  and  what  is
addressed  in  saying  “I”,  is  always  met  as  the  same  persisting  something.
The characteristics of ‘simplicity’, ‘substantiality’, and ‘personality’, which
Kant,  for  instance,  made  the  basis  for  his  doctrine  ‘of  the  paralogisms  of
pure  reason’,(xv)  arise  from  a  genuine  pre-phenomenological  experience.
The question remains whether that which we have experienced ontically in

this way may be Interpreted ontologically with the help of the ‘categories’
mentioned.
 

xii. Cf. Section 25, H. 114 ff.
xiii. Cf. Section 43c, H. 211.
xiv. Cf. Section 41, H. 193.
xv. Cf. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, second edition, p. 399; and especially the treatment in the

first edition, pp. 348 ff.

H. 319

 

Kant, indeed, in strict conformity with the phenomenal content given in
saying  “I”,  shows  that  the  ontical  theses  about  the  soul-substance  which
have  been  inferred  [erschlossenen]  from  these  characteristics,  are  without
justification. But in so doing, he merely rejects a wrong ontical explanation
of  the  “I”;  he  has  by  no  means  achieved  an  ontological  Interpretation  of
Selfhood, nor has he even obtained some assurance of it and made positive
preparation  for  it.  Kant  makes  a  more  rigorous  attempt  than  his
predecessors to keep hold of the phenomenal content of saying “I”; yet even
though in theory he has denied that the ontical foundations of the ontology
of  the  substantial  apply  to  the  “I”,  he  still  slips  back  into  this  same
inappropriate  ontology.  This  will  be  shown  more  exactly,  in  order  that  we
may establish what it means ontologically to take saying “I” as the starting-
point for the analysis of Selfhood. The Kantian analysis of the ‘I think’ is
now  to  be  adduced  as  an  illustration,  but  only  so  far  as  is  demanded  for
clarifying these problems.(xvi)

The  ‘I’  is  a  bare  consciousness,  accompanying  all  concepts.  In  the  ‘I’,
‘nothing  more  is  represented  than  a  transcendental  subject  of  thoughts’.
‘Consciousness in itself (is) not so much a representation... as it is a form of
representation in general.’(xvii) The ‘I think’ is ‘the form of apperception,
which clings to every experience and precedes it’.(xviii)

Kant grasps the phenomenal content of the ‘I’ correctly in the expression
‘I think’, or—if one also pays heed to including the ‘practical person’ when
one  speaks  of  ‘intelligence’—in  the  expression  ‘I  take  action’.  In  Kant’s
sense we must take saying “I” as saying “I think”. Kant tries to establish the
phenomenal  content  of  the  “I”  as res  cogitans. If  in  doing  so  he  calls  this
“I” a ‘logical subject’, that does not mean that the “I” in general is a concept
obtained  merely  by  way  of  logic.  The  “I”  is  rather  the  subject  of  logical

behaviour,  of  binding  together.  ‘I  think’  means  ‘I  bind  together’.  All
binding together is an ‘I bind together’. In any taking-together or relating,
the  “I”  always  underlies—the  ὑποκείμενον.  The  subjectum  is  therefore
‘consciousness  in  itself’,  not  a  representation  but  rather  the  ‘form’  of
representation. That is to say, the “I think” is not something represented, but
the formal structure of representing as such, and this formal structure alone
makes it possible for anything to have been represented. When we speak of
the  “form”  of  representation,  we  have  in  view  neither  a  framework  nor  a
universal  concept,  but  that  which,  as  εἶδος,  makes  every  representing  and
everything represented be what it is. If the “I” is understood as the form of
representation, this amounts to saying that it is the ‘logical subject’.
 

xvi.  On  the  analysis  of  transcendental  apperception,  one  may  now  consult  Martin  Heidegger,
Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik (zweite unveränderte Auflage, 1951), Division III. [This note
replaces the following note in the earlier editions, referring to a portion of Being and Time which has
never  appeared:  ‘The  first  division  of  the  second  part  of  this  treatise  will  bring  the  concrete
phenomenologico-critical 
its  ontological
signification.’—Tr.]

transcendental 

analysis  of 

apperception 

and 

xvii. Kant, op. cit., second edition, p. 404.
xviii. Kant, op. cit., first edition p. 354.

H. 320

 

Kant’s  analysis  has  two  positive  aspects.  For  one  thing,  he  sees  the
impossibility of ontically reducing the “I” to a substance; for another thing,
he holds fast to the “I” as ‘I think’. Nevertheless, he takes this “I” as subject
again,  and  he  does  so  in  a  sense  which  is  ontologically  inappropriate.  For
the ontological concept of the subject characterizes not the Selfhood of the
“I”  q  u  a   Self,  but  the  selfsameness  and  steadiness  of  something  that  is
always present-at-hand. To define the “I” ontologically as “subject” means
to  regard  it as  something  always  present-at-hand.  The  Being  of  the  “I”  is
understood as the Reality of the res cogitans.(xix)
 

xix.  The  fact  that  in  taking  the  ontological  character  of  the  personal  Self  as  something
‘substantial’, Kant has still kept basically within the horizon of the inappropriate ontology of what is
present-at-hand within-the-world, becomes plain from the material which H. Heimsoeth has worked
over  in  his  essay  ‘Persönlichkeitsbewusstsein  und  Ding  an  sich  in  der  Kantischen  Philosophie’
(reprinted from Immanuel Kant. Festschrift zur zweiten Jahrhundertfeier seines Geburtstages, 1924).
The line taken in the essay goes beyond giving a mere historiological report, and is aimed towards
the ‘categorial’ problem of personality.

Heimsoeth says: ‘Too little note has been taken of the intimate way in which the theoretical and
the practical reason are worked into one another in Kant’s practice and planning; too little heed has
been given to the fact that even here the categories (as opposed to the way in which they are filled in
naturalistically  in  the  ‘principles’)  explicitly  retain  their  validity  and,  under  the  primacy  of  the
practical reason, are to find a new application detached from naturalistic rationalism (substance, for
instance,  in  the  ‘person’  and  personal  immortality;  causality  as  the  ‘causality  of  freedom’;  and
reciprocity in the ‘community of rational creatures’; and so forth). They serve as intellectual fixatives
for a new way of access to the unconditioned, without seeking to give any ratiocinative knowledge of
it as an object.’ (pp. 31 f.)

But here the real ontological problem has been passed over. We cannot leave aside the question
of  whether  these  ‘categories’  can  retain  their  primordial  validity  and  only  need  to  be  applied  in
another way, or whether they do not rather pervert the ontological problematics of Dasein from the
ground up. Even if the theoretical reason has been built into the practical, the existential-ontological
problem of the Self remains not merely unsolved; it has not even been raised. On what ontological
basis is the ‘working into one another’ of the theoretical and the practical reason to be performed? Is
it theoretical or practical behaviour that determines the kind of Being of a person, or neither of them
—and if neither, then what is it? In spite of their fundamental significance, do not the paralogisms
make  manifest  how  ontologically  groundless  are  the  problematics  of  the  Self  from  Descartes’  res
cogitans right up to Hegel’s concept of spirit? One does not need to think either ‘naturalistically’ or
‘rationalistically’, and yet one may be under the domination of the ontology of the ‘substantial’—a
domination which is only more baleful because it is seemingly self-evident.

See  what  is  essentially  a  supplement  to  the  above-mentioned  essay:  Heimsoeth,  ‘Die
metaphysischen Motive in der Ausbildung  des Kritischen Idealismus’, Kantstudien, XXIX,  (1924),
pp. 121 ff. For a critique of Kant’s conception of the “I”, see also Max Scheler, Der Formalismus in
der  Ethik  und  die  materiale  Wertethik,  Part  Two,  in  this  Yearbook  [Jahrbuch  für  Philosophie  und
Phänomenologische  Forschung]  vol.  II,  1916,  pp.  246  ff.  (‘Person  und  das  “Ich”  der
transzendentalen Apperzeption’). [This section is to be found on pp. 384 ff. of the fourth edition of
Scheler’s work, Bern, 1954.—Tr.]

H. 321

 

But how does it come about that while the ‘I think’ gives Kant a genuine
phenomenal starting-point, he cannot exploit it ontologically, and has to fall
back on the ‘subject’—that is to say, something substantial? The “I” is not
just an ‘I think’, but an ‘I think something’. And does not Kant himself keep
on stressing that the “I” remains related to its representations, and would be
nothing without them?

For  Kant,  however,  these  representations  are  the  ‘empirical’,  which  is
‘accompanied’ by the “I”—the appearances to which the “I” ‘clings’. Kant
nowhere shows the kind of Being of this ‘clinging’ and ‘accompanying’. At
bottom, however, their kind of Being is understood as the constant Being-
present-at-hand  of  the  “I”  along  with  its  representations.  Kant  has  indeed
avoided  cutting  the  “I”  adrift  from  thinking;  but  he  has  done  so  without
starting  with  the  ‘I  think’  itself  in  its  full  essential  content  as  an  ‘I  think

is  ontologically
something’,  and  above  all,  without  seeing  what 
‘presupposed’ in taking the ‘I think something’ as a basic characteristic of
the  Self.  For  even  the  ‘I  think  something’  is  not  definite  enough
the  ‘something’  remains
ontologically  as  a  starting-point,  because 
indefinite. If by this “something” we understand an entity within-the-world,
then  it  tacitly  implies  that  the  world has  been  presupposed;  and  this  very
phenomenon  of  the  world  co-determines  the  state  of  Being  of  the  “I”,  if
indeed  it  is  to  be  possible  for  the  “I”  to  be  something  like  an  ‘I  think
something’. In saying “I”, I have in view the entity which in each case I am
as an ‘I-am-in-a-world’. Kant did not see the phenomenon of the world, and
was consistent enough to keep the ‘representations’ apart from the a priori
content of the ‘I think’. But as a consequence the “I” was again forced back
to  an  isolated  subject,  accompanying  representations  in  a  way  which  is
ontologically quite indefinite.(xx)

In  saying  “I”,  Dasein  expresses  itself  as  Being-in-the-world.  But  does
saying “I” in the everyday manner have itself in view as being-in-the-world
[in-der-Welt-seiend]?  Here  we  must  make  a  distinction.  When  saying  “I”,
Dasein  surely  has  in  view  the  entity  which,  in  every  case,  it  is  itself.  The
everyday interpretation of the Self, however, has a tendency to understand
itself in terms of the ‘world’ with which it is concerned. When Dasein has
itself in view ontically, it fails to see itself in relation to the kind of Being of
that entity which it is itself. And this holds especially for the basic state of
Dasein, Being-in-the-world.(xxi)
 

xx. Cf. our phenomenological critique of Kant’s ‘Refutation of Idealism’, Section 43a, H. 202 ff.
xxi. Cf. Sections 12 and 13, H. 52 ff.

H. 322

 

What is the motive for this ‘fugitive’ way of saying “I”? It is motivated
by Dasein’s falling; for as falling, it flees in the face of itself into the “they”.
(1)  When  the  “I”  talks  in  the  ‘natural’  manner,  this  is  performed  by  the
they-self.(2) What expresses itself in the ‘I’ is that Self which, proximally
and for the most part, I am not authentically. When one is absorbed in the
everyday  multiplicity  and  the  rapid  succession  [Sich-jagen]  of  that  with
which  one  is  concerned,  the  Self  of  the  self-forgetful  “I  am  concerned’
shows itself as something simple which is constantly selfsame but indefinite

and empty. Yet one is that with which one concerns oneself. In the ‘natural’
ontical  way  in  which  the  “I”  talks,  the  phenomenal  content  of  the  Dasein
which  one  has  in  view  in  the  “I”  gets  overlooked;  but  this  gives  no
justification for our joining in this overlooking of it, or for forcing upon the
problematic  of  the  Self  an  inappropriate  ‘categorial’  horizon  when  we
Interpret the “I” ontologically.
 

1. ‘Durch das Verfallen des Daseins, als welches es vor sich selbst flieht in das Man.’ The ‘es’

appears only in the later editions.

2. ‘Die “natürliche” Ich-Rede vollzieht das Man-selbst.’

Of course by thus refusing to follow the everyday way in which the “I”
talks,  our  ontological  Interpretation  of  the  ‘I’  has  by  no  means  solved  the
problem; but it has indeed prescribed the direction for any further inquiries.
In the “I”, we have in view that entity which one is in ‘being-in-the-world’.
Being-already-in-a-world,  however,  as  Being-alongside-the-ready-to-
hand-within-the-world, means equiprimordially that one is ahead of oneself.
With the ‘I’, what we have in view is that entity for which the issue is  the
Being  of  the  entity  that  it  is.  With  the  ‘I’,  care  expresses  itself,  though
proximally and for the most part in the ‘fugitive’ way in which the “I” talks
when  it  concerns  itself  with  something.  The  they-self  keeps  on  saying  “I”
most  loudly  and  most  frequently  because  at  bottom  it  is  not  authentically
itself  and  evades  its  authentic  potentiality-for-Being.  If  the  ontological
constitution of the Self is not to be traced back either to an “I”-substance or
to a ‘subject’, but if, on the contrary, the everyday fugitive way in which we
keep  on  saying  “I”  must  be  understood  in  terms  of  our  authentic
potentiality-for-Being, then the proposition that the Self is the basis of care
and constantly present-at-hand, is one that still does not follow. Selfhood is
to be discerned existentially only in one’s authentic potentiality-for-Being-
one’s-Self—that is to say, in the authenticity of Dasein’s Being as care. In
terms  of care  the constancy of  the  Self,  as the  supposed persistence of the
subjectum, gets clarified. But the phenomenon of this authentic potentiality-
for-Being also opens our eyes for the constancy of the Self in the sense of its
having achieved some sort of position.(1) The constancy of the Self, in  the
double  sense  of  steadiness  and  steadfastness,  is  the  authentic  counter-
possibility  to  the  non-Self-constancy  which  is  characteristic  of  irresolute
falling.(2)  Existentially,  “Self-constancy”  signifies  nothing  other  than

anticipatory  resoluteness.  The  ontological  structure  of  such  resoluteness
reveals the existentiality of the Self’s Selfhood.
 

1.  ‘…für  die  Ständigkeit  des  Selbst  in  dem  Sinn  des  Standgewonnenhabens.’  Here  our  usual
translation of ‘Ständigkeit’ as ‘constancy’ seems inadequate; possibly ‘stability’ would be closer to
what is meant.

2. ‘Die Ständigkeit des Selbst im Doppelsinne der beständigen Standfestigkeit ist die eigentliche
Gegenmöglichkeit zur Unselbst-ständigkeit des unentschlossenen Verfallens.’ The italicization of the
opening words of this sentence appears only in the later editions.

Here, as on H. 117 and 303, Heidegger exploits various meanings of the adjective ‘ständig’ and
other  words  derived  from  the  base  ‘stā-’,  with  the  root-meaning  of  ‘standing’.  The  noun
‘Unselbständigkeit’  ordinarily  stands  for  inability  to  stand  on  one’s  own  feet  or  to  make  up  one’s
mind  independently.  But  Heidegger  expands  it  to  ‘Unselbst-ständigkeit’,  which  not  only  suggests
instability and a failure to stand by oneself, but also the constancy or stability of that which is other
than  the  Self—the  non-Self,  or  more  specifically,  the  they-self.  In  the  following  sentence  the  noun
‘Selbständigkeit’,  which  ordinarily  stands  for  autonomy,  independence,  or  self-subsistence,  is
similarly expanded to ‘Selbst-ständigkeit’—‘Self-constancy’.

H. 323

 

Dasein  is  authentically  itself  in  the  primordial  individualization  of  the
reticent resoluteness which exacts anxiety of itself. As something that keeps
silent, authentic Being-one’s-Self is just the sort of thing that does not keep
on saying ‘I’; but  in  its reticence it ‘is’ that  thrown  entity  as  which  it  can
authentically  b e. The Self which the reticence of resolute existence unveils
is the primordial phenomenal basis for the question as to the Being of the
‘I’. Only if we are oriented phenomenally by the meaning of the Being of
the  authentic  potentiality-for-Being-one’s-Self  are  we  put  in  a  position  to
discuss  what  ontological  justification  there  is  for  treating  substantiality,
simplicity,  and  personality  as  characteristics  of  Selfhood.  In  the  prevalent
way of saying “I”, it is constantly suggested that what we have in advance
is a Self-Thing, persistently present-at-hand; the ontological question of the
Being of the Self must turn away from any such suggestion.

Care  does  not  need  to  be  founded  in  a  Self.  But  existentiality,  as
constitutive for care, provides the ontological constitution of Dasein’s Self-
constancy,  to  which  there  belongs,  in  accordance  with  the  full  structural
content  of  care,  its  Being-fallen  factically  into  non-Self-constancy.  When
fully  conceived,  the  care-structure  includes  the  phenomenon  of  Selfhood.
This phenomenon is clarified by Interpreting the meaning of care; and it is
as care that Dasein’s totality of Being has been defined.

65. Temporality as the Ontological Meaning of Care

In  characterizing  the  ‘connection’  between  care  and  Selfhood,  our  aim
was not only to clarify the special problem of “I”-hood, but also to help in
the final preparation for getting into our grasp phenomenally the totality of
Dasein’s  structural  whole.  We  need  the  unwavering  discipline  of  the
existential way of putting the question, if, for our ontological point of view,
Dasein’s  kind  of  Being  is  not  to  be  finally  perverted  into  a  mode  of
presence-at-hand,  even  one  which  is  wholly  undifferentiated.  Dasein
becomes  ‘essentially’  Dasein  in  that  authentic  existence  which  constitutes
itself  as  anticipatory  resoluteness.(1)  Such  resoluteness,  as  a  mode  of  the
authenticity  of  care,  contains  Dasein’s  primordial  Self-constancy  and
totality.  We  must  take  an  undistracted  look  at  these  and  understand  them
existentially  if  we  are  to  lay  bare  the  ontological  meaning  of  Dasein’s
Being.
 

1.  ‘Das  Dasein  wird  “wesentlich”  in  der  eigentlichen  Existenz,  die  sich  als  vorlaufende

Entschlossenheit konstituiert.’

H. 324

 

 

What are we seeking ontologically with the meaning of care? What does
“meaning”  signify?  In  our  investigation,  we  have  encountered  this
phenomenon  in  connection  with  the  analysis  of  understanding  and
interpretation.(xxii) According to that analysis, meaning is that wherein the
understandability [Verstehbarkeit] of something maintains itself—even that
of  something  which  does  not  come  into  view  explicitly  and  thematically.
“Meaning”  signifies  the  “upon-which”  [das  Woraufhin]  of  a  primary
projection in terms of which something can be conceived in its possibility
as  that  which  it  is.  Projecting  discloses  possibilities—that  is  to  say,  it
discloses the sort of thing that makes possible.

To lay bare the “upon-which” of a projection, amounts to disclosing that
which makes possible what has been projected.(1) To lay it bare in this way
requires methodologically that we study the projection (usually a tacit one)
which underlies an interpretation, and that we do so in such a way that what
has  been  projected  in  the  projecting  can  be  disclosed  and  grasped  with
regard to its “upon-which”. To set forth the meaning of care means, then, to

follow  up  the  projection  which  guides  and  underlies  the  primordial
existential Interpretation of Dasein, and to follow it up in such a way that in
what  is  here  projected,  its  “upon-which”  may  be  seen.  What  has  been
projected is the Being of Dasein, and it is disclosed in what constitutes that
Being  as  an  authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole.(2)  That  upon  which
the  Being  which  has  been  disclosed  and  is  thus  constituted  has  been
projected, is that which itself makes possible this Constitution of Being as
care.  When  we  inquire  about  the  meaning  of  care,  we  are  asking  what
makes possible the totality of the articulated structural whole of care, in the
unity of its articulation as we have unfolded it.
 

xxii. Cf. Section 32, H. 148 ff., especially H. 151 f.

1.  ‘Das  Woraufhin  eines  Entwurfs  freilegen,  besagt,  das  erschliessen,  was  das  Entworfene
ermöglicht.’ This sentence is ambiguous in that ‘das Entworfene’ (‘what is projected’) may be either
the subject or the direct object of ‘ermöglicht’ (‘makes possible’).

2. ‘Das Entworfene ist das Sein des Daseins und zwar erschlossen in dem, was es als eigentliches
Ganzseinkönnen  konstituiert.’  This  sentence  too  is  ambiguous  in  its  structure;  we  have  chosen  the
interpretation which seems most plausible in the light of the following sentence.

Taken  strictly,  “meaning”  signifies  the  “upon-which”  of  the  primary
projection  of  the  understanding  of  Being.  When  Being-in-the-world  has
been  disclosed  to  itself  and  understands  the  Being  of  that  entity  which  it
itself  is,  it  understands  equiprimordially  the  Being  of  entities  discovered
within-the-world,  even if  such Being  has not  been made a theme,  and has
not  yet  even  been  differentiated  into  its  primary  modes  of  existence  and
Reality. All ontical experience of entities—both circumspective calculation
of the ready-to-hand, and positive scientific cognition of the present-at-hand
—is  based  upon  projections  of  the  Being  of  the  corresponding  entities—
projections  which  in  every  case  are  more  or  less  transparent.  But  in  these
projections  there  lies  hidden  the  “upon-which”  of  the  projection;  and  on
this, as it were, the understanding of Being nourishes itself.

H. 325

If  we  say  that  entities  ‘have  meaning’,  this  signifies  that  they  have
become  accessible  in  their  Being;  and  this  Being,  as  projected  upon  its
“upon-which”,  is  what  ‘really’  ‘has  meaning’  first  of  all.  Entities  ‘have’
meaning only because, as Being which has been disclosed beforehand, they

 

 

become intelligible in the projection of that Being—that is to say, in terms
of  the  “upon-which”  of  that  projection.  The  primary  projection  of  the
understanding  of  Being  ‘gives’  the  meaning.  The  question  about  the
meaning  of the  Being  of an entity  takes as its theme  the  “upon-which”  of
that understanding of Being which underlies all Being of entities.(1)

Dasein  is  either  authentically  or  inauthentically  disclosed  to  itself  as
regards  its  existence.  In  existing,  Dasein  understands  itself;  and  in  such  a
way,  indeed,  that  this  understanding  does  not  merely  get  something  in  its
grasp,  but  makes  up  the  existentiell  Being  of  its  factical  potentiality-for-
Being.  The  Being  which  is  disclosed  is  that  of  an  entity  for  which  this
Being  is  an  issue.  The  meaning  of  this  Being—that  is,  of  care—is  what
makes  care  possible  in  its  Constitution;  and  it  is  what  makes  up
primordially  the  Being  of  this  potentiality-for-Being.  The  meaning  of
Dasein’s  Being  is  not  something  free-floating  which  is  other  than  and
‘outside of’ itself, but is the self-understanding Dasein itself. What makes
possible the Being of Dasein, and therewith its factical existence?

That  which  was  projected  in  the  primordial  existential  projection  of
existence has revealed itself as anticipatory resoluteness. What makes this
authentic Being-a-whole of Dasein possible  with  regard  to  the  unity of its
articulated  structural  whole?(2)  Anticipatory  resoluteness,  when  taken
formally  and  existentially,  without  our  constantly  designating  its  full
structural content, is Being towards one’s ownmost, distinctive potentiality-
for-Being.  This  sort  of  thing  is  possible  only  in  that  Dasein  can,  indeed,
come towards itself in its ownmost possibility, and that it can put up with
this possibility as a possibility in thus letting itself come towards itself—in
other  words,  that  it  exists.  This  letting-itself-come-towards-itself  in  that
distinctive possibility which it puts up with, is the primordial phenomenon
of the future as coming towards.(3) If either authentic or inauthentic Being-
towards-death belongs to Dasein’s Being, then such Being-towards-death is
possible only as something futural [als zukünftiges], in the sense which we
have now indicated, and which we have still to define more closely. By the
term  ‘futural’,  we  do  not  here  have  in  view  a  “now”  which  has  not  yet
become ‘actual’ and which sometime will be for the first time. We have in
view the coming [Kunft] in which Dasein, in its ownmost potentiality-for-
Being,  comes  towards  itself.  Anticipation  makes  Dasein  authentically
futural, and in such a way that the anticipation itself is possible only in so

far as Dasein, as being, is always coming towards itself—that is to say, in
so far as it is futural in its Being in general.
 

1. ‘Die Frage nach dem Sinn des Seins eines Seienden macht das Woraufhin des allem Sein von
Seiendem  zugrundeliegenden  Seinsverstehens  zum  Thema.’  The  earlier  editions  read  ‘...des  allem
ontischen  S e i n  z u  Seiendem...’ (‘...all ontical Being towards entities…’

2.  ‘Was  ermöglicht  dieses  eigentliche  Ganzsein  des  Daseins  hinsichtlich  der  Einheit  seines

gegliederten Strukturganzen?’

3. ‘Das die ausgezeichnete Möglichkeit aushaltende, in ihr sich auf sich Zukommen-lassen ist das
ursprüngliche Phänomen der Zu-kunft.’ While the hyphen in ‘Zukommen-lassen’ appears only in the
later editions, the more important hyphen in ‘Zu-kunft’ appears in both later and earlier editions. In
the later editions, however, it comes at the end of the line, so that the force which was presumably
intended is lost.

Without the hyphen, ‘Zukunft’ is the ordinary word for ‘the future’; with the hyphen, Heidegger
evidently  wishes  to  call  attention  to  its  kinship  with  the  expression  ‘zukommen  auf...’  (‘to  come
towards...’  or  ‘to  come  up  to...’)  and  its  derivation  from  ‘zu’  (‘to’  or  ‘towards’)  and  ‘kommen’
(‘come’).  Hence  our  hendiadys.  (The  use  of  ‘zukommen’  with  the  preposition  ‘auf’  is  to  be
distinguished from a use of this same verb with the dative which we have met in earlier chapters in
the sense of ‘belongs to...’, ‘is becoming to...’, or ‘has coming to…’).

H. 326

 

Anticipatory resoluteness understands Dasein in its own essential Being-
guilty.  This  understanding  means  that  in  existing  one  takes  over  Being-
guilty;  it  means  being  the  thrown  basis  of  nullity.  But  taking  over
thrownness  signifies  being  Dasein  authentically  as  it  already  was.(1)
Taking  over  thrownness,  however,  is  possible  only  in  such  a  way  that  the
futural  Dasein  can  be  its  ownmost  ‘as-it-already-was’—that  is  to  say,  its
‘been’ [sein “Gewesen”]. Only in so far as Dasein is as an “I-am-as-having-
been”, can Dasein come towards itself futurally in such a way that it comes
back.(2) As authentically futural, Dasein is authentically as “having  been”.
(3) Anticipation of one’s uttermost and ownmost possibility is coming back
understandingly  to  one’s  ownmost  “been”.  Only  so  far  as  it  is  futural  can
Dasein  be  authentically  as  having  been.  The  character  of  “having  been”
arises, in a certain way, from the future.(4)
 

1.  ‘Übernahme  der  Geworfenheit  aber  bedeutet,  das  Dasein  in  dem,  wie  es  je  schon  war,

eigentlich sein.’

2.  ‘Nur  sofern  Dasein  überhaupt  ist  als  ich  bin-gewesen,  kann  es  zukünftig  auf  sich  selbst  so
zukommen, dass es zurück-kommt.’ Many German verbs form their perfect tense with the help of the
auxiliary ‘sein’ (‘to be’) in place of the somewhat more usual ‘haben’ (‘have’), just as we sometimes
say in English ‘he is gone’ instead of ‘he has gone’. Among such verbs is ‘sein’ itself. This ‘I have

been’ is expressed by ‘ich bin gewesen’; this might be translated as ‘I am been’, but in this context
we have ventured to translate it as ‘I am as having been’.

3. ‘Eigentlich zukünftig ist das Dasein eigentlich gewesen.’
4.  ‘Die  Gewesenheit  entspringt  in  gewisser  Weise  der  Zukunft.’  Here  ‘The  character  of  having
been’ represents ‘Die Gewesenheit’ (literally, ‘beenhood’). Heidegger distinguishes this sharply from
‘die  Vergangenheit’  (‘pastness’).  We  shall  frequently  translate  ‘Gewesenheit’  simply  as  ‘having
been’.

Anticipatory resoluteness discloses the current Situation of the “there” in
such a way  that existence, in  taking action,  is  circumspectively concerned
with  what  is  factically  ready-to-hand  environmentally.  Resolute  Being-
alongside  what  is  ready-to-hand  in  the  Situation—that  is  to  say,  taking
action  in  such  a  way  as  to  let  one  encounter  what  has  presence
environmentally—is possible only by making such an entity present.  Only
as  the  Present  [Gegenwart](1)  in  the  sense  of  making  present,  can
resoluteness  be  what 
itself  be  encountered
undisguisedly by that which it seizes upon in taking action.

is:  namely, 

letting 

it 

Coming  back  to  itself  futurally,  resoluteness  brings  itself  into  the
Situation by making present. The character of “having been” arises from the
future, and in such a way that the future which “has been” (or better, which
“is in the process of having been”) releases from itself the Present.(2) This
phenomenon has the unity of a future which makes present in the process of
having been; we designate it as “temporality”.(3) Only in so far as Dasein
has  the  definite  character  of  temporality,  is  the  authentic  potentiality-for-
Being-a-whole of anticipatory resoluteness, as we  have described it, made
possible  for  Dasein  itself.  Temporality  reveals  itself  as  the  meaning  of
authentic care.
 

1. On our expressions ‘having presence’, ‘making present’, and ‘the Present’, see our notes 1 and

2 on H. 25 above.

2.  ‘Die  Gewesenheit  entspringt  der  Zukunft,  so  zwar,  dass  die  gewesene  (besser  gewesende)
Zukunft die Gegenwart aus sich entlässt.’ Heidegger has coined the form ‘gewesend’ by fusing the
past participle ‘gewesen’ with the suffix of the present participle ‘-end’, as if in English one were to
write ‘beening’.

3. ‘Dies dergestalt als gewesend-gegenwärtigende Zukunft einheitliche Phänomen nennen wir die

Zeitlichkeit.’

H. 327

 

The phenomenal content of this meaning, drawn from the state of Being
term
in 

of  anticipatory  resoluteness,  fills 

the  signification  of 

the 

“temporality”.  In  our  terminological  use  of  this  expression,  we  must  hold
ourselves aloof from all those significations of ‘future’, ‘past’, and ‘Present’
which thrust themselves upon us from the ordinary conception of time. This
holds also for conceptions of a ‘time’ which is ‘subjective’ or ‘Objective’,
‘immanent’  or  ‘transcendent’.  Inasmuch  as  Dasein  understands  itself  in  a
way  which,  proximally  and  for  the  most  part,  is  inauthentic,  we  may
suppose  that  ‘time’  as  ordinarily  understood  does  indeed  represent  a
genuine  phenomenon,  but  one  which  is  derivative  [ein  abkünftiges].  It
arises  from  inauthentic  temporality,  which  has  a  source  of  its  own.  The
conceptions of ‘future’, ‘past’ and ‘Present’ have first arisen in terms of the
inauthentic  way  of  understanding  time.  In  terminologically  delimiting  the
primordial and authentic phenomena which correspond to these, we have to
struggle against the same difficulty which keeps all ontological terminology
in its grip. When violences are done in this field of investigation, they are
not arbitrary but have a necessity grounded in the facts. If, however, we are
to point out without gaps in the argument, how inauthentic temporality has
its source in temporality which is primordial and authentic, the primordial
phenomenon, which we have described only in a rough and ready fashion,
must first be worked out correctly.

If resoluteness makes up the mode of authentic care, and if this itself is
possible only through temporality, then the phenomenon at which we have
arrived  by  taking  a  look  at  resoluteness,  must  present  us  with  only  a
modality of temporality, by which, after all, care as such is made possible.
Dasein’s totality of Being as care means: ahead-of-itself-already-being-in (a
world)  as  Being-alongside  (entities  encountered  within-the-world).  When
we first fixed upon this articulated structure, we suggested that with regard
to  this  articulation  the  ontological  question  must  be  pursued  still  further
back until the unity of the totality of this structural manifoldness has been
laid  bare.(xxiii)  The  primordial  unity  of  the  structure  of  care  lies  in
temporality.

The  “ahead-of-itself”  is  grounded  in  the  future.  In  the  “Being-already-
in...”, the character of “having been” is made known. “Being-alongside…”
becomes possible in making present. While the “ahead” includes the notion
of a “before”,(1) neither the ‘before’ in the ‘ahead’ nor the ‘already’ is to be
taken  in  terms  of  the  way  time  is  ordinarily  understood;  this  has  been
automatically ruled out by what has been said above. With this ‘before’ we
do not have in mind ‘in advance of something’ [das “Vorher”] in the sense

of ‘not yet now—but later’; the ‘already’ is just as far from signifying ‘no
longer now—but earlier’. If the expressions ‘before’ and ‘already’ were to
have a time-oriented [zeithafte] signification such as this (and they can have
this signification too), then to say that care has temporality would be to say
that it is something which is ‘earlier’ and ‘later’, ‘not yet’ and ‘no longer’.
Care would then be conceived as an entity which occurs and runs its course
‘in  time’.  The  Being  of  an  entity  having  the  character  of  Dasein  would
become something present-at-hand. If this sort of thing is impossible, then
any  time-oriented  signification  which  the  expressions  we  have  mentioned
may have, must be different from this. The ‘before’ and the ‘ahead’ indicate
the future as of a sort which would make it possible for Dasein to be such
that  its  potentiality-for-Being  is  an  issue.(2)  Self-projection  upon  the  ‘for-
the-sake-of-oneself’  is  grounded  in  the  future  and  is  an  essential
characteristic of existentiality.  The  primary meaning of  existentiality is  the
future.
 

xxiii. Cf. Section 41, H. 196.

1. We have interpolated this clause in our translation to give point to Heidegger’s remark about
‘the “before” in the “ahead” ’ (‘das “Vor” im “Vorweg” ’), which is obvious enough in German but
would  otherwise  seem  very  far-fetched  in  English.  We  have  of  course  met  the  expression  ‘vor’  in
many  contexts—in  ‘Vorhabe’,  ‘Vorsicht,  and  ‘Vorgriff’  as  ‘fore-structures’  of  understanding  (H.
150), and in such expressions as ‘that in the face of which’ (‘das “Wovor” ’) one fears or flees or has
anxiety (H. 140, 184, 251, etc.). Here, however, the translation ‘before’ seems more appropriate.

2. ‘Das “vor” und “vorweg” zeigt die Zukunft an, als welche sie überhaupt erst ermöglicht, dass
Dasein so sein kann, dass es ihm um sein Seinkönnen geht.’ The pronoun ‘sie’ appears only in the
later editions.

 

 

H. 328

Likewise,  with  the  ‘already’  we  have  in  view  the  existential  temporal
meaning  of  the  Being  of  that  entity  which,  in  so  far  as  it  is,  is  already
something  that  has  been  thrown.  Only  because  care  is  based  on  the
character of “having been”, can Dasein exist as the thrown entity which it
is. ‘As long as’ Dasein factically exists, it is never past [vergangen], but it
always  is  indeed  as  already  having  been,  in  the  sense  of  the  “I  am-as-
having-been”. And only as long as Dasein is, can it be as having been. On
the  other  hand,  we  call  an  entity  “past”,  when  it  is  no  longer  present-at-
hand.  Therefore  Dasein,  in  existing,  can  never  establish  itself  as  a  fact
which is present-at-hand, arising and passing away ‘in the course of time’,

with a bit of it past already. Dasein never ‘finds itself’ except as a thrown
Fact. In the state-of-mind in which it finds itself, Dasein is assailed by itself
as  the  entity  which  it  still  is  and  already  was—that  is  to  say,  which  it
constantly is as having been.(1) The primary existential meaning of facticity
lies in the character of “having been”. In our formulation of the structure of
care, the temporal meaning of existentiality and facticity is indicated by the
expressions ‘before’ and ‘already’.

On the other hand, we lack such an indication for the third item which is
constitutive  for  care—the  Being-alongside  which  falls.  This  should  not
signify  that  falling  is  not  also  grounded  in  temporality;  it  should  instead
give us a hint that making-present, as the primary basis for falling  into the
ready-to-hand  and  present-at-hand  with  which  we  concern  ourselves,
remains included in the future and in having been, and is included in these
in the mode of primordial temporality. When resolute, Dasein has brought
itself  back  from  falling,  and  has  done  so  precisely  in  order  to  be  more
authentically  ‘there’  in  the  ‘moment  of  vision’  as  regards  the  Situation
which has been disclosed.(2)
 

1. ‘In der Befindlichkeit wird das Dasein von ihm selbst überfallen als das Seiende, das es, noch
seiend,  schon  war,  das  heisst  gewesen  ständig  ist.’  We  have  expanded  our  usual  translation  of
‘Befindlichkeit’ to bring out better the connection with the previous sentence.

2.  ‘Entschlossen  hat  sich  das  Dasein  gerade  zurückgeholt  aus  dem  Verafallen,  um  desto
eigentlicher  im  “Augenblick”  auf  die  erschlossene  Situation  “da”  zu  sein.’  The  German  word
‘Augenblick’ has hitherto been translated simply as ‘moment’; but here, and in many later passages,
Heidegger  has  in  mind  its  more  literal  meaning—‘a  glance  of  the  eye’.  In  such  passages  it  seems
more appropriate to translate it as ‘moment of vision’. See Section 68 below, especially H. 338.

Temporality makes possible the unity of existence, facticity, and falling,
and in this way constitutes primordially the totality of the structure of care.
The  items  of  care  have  not  been  pieced  together  cumulatively  any  more
than  temporality  itself  has  been  put  together  ‘in  the  course  of  time’  [“mit
der Zeit”] out of the future, the having been, and the Present. Temporality
‘is’ not an entity at all. It is not, but it temporalizes itself. Nevertheless, we
cannot avoid saying, ‘Temporality “is”... the meaning of care’, ‘Temporality
“is”...  defined  in  such  and  such  a  way’;  the  reason  for  this  can  be  made
intelligible  only  when  we  have  clarified  the  idea  of  Being  and  that  of  the
‘is’  in  general.  Temporality  temporalizes,  and  indeed  it  temporalizes
possible  ways  of  itself.  These  make  possible  the  multiplicity  of  Dasein’s

modes  of  Being,  and  especially  the  basic  possibility  of  authentic  or
inauthentic existence.

H. 329

 

the  ‘time’  which 

The  future,  the  character  of  having  been,  and  the  Present,  show  the
phenomenal characteristics of the ‘towards-oneself’, the ‘back-to’, and the
‘letting-oneself-be-encountered-by’.(1) The phenomena of the “towards...”,
the  “to...”,  and  the  “alongside...”,  make  temporality  manifest  as  the
ἐκστατικόν pure and simple. Temporality is the primordial ‘outside-of-itself’
in  and  for  itself.  We  therefore  call  the  phenomena  of  the  future,  the
character of having been, and the Present, the “ecstases” of temporality.(2)
Temporality is not, prior to this, an entity which first emerges from itself; its
essence is  a process of temporalizing  in  the  unity of the  ecstases.  What is
the  ordinary
characteristic  of 
understanding, consists, among other things, precisely in the fact that it is a
pure sequence of “nows”, without beginning and without end, in which the
ecstatical character of primordial temporality has been levelled off. But this
very levelling off, in accordance with its existential meaning, is grounded in
the possibility of a definite kind of temporalizing, in conformity with which
temporality  temporalizes  as  inauthentic  the  kind  of  ‘time’  we  have  just
mentioned. If, therefore, we demonstrate that the ‘time’ which is accessible
to  Dasein’s  common  sense  is  not  primordial,  but  arises  rather  from
authentic temporality, then,  in  accordance with  the  principle, “a  potiori fit
denominatio”,  we  are  justified  in  designating  as  “primordial  time”  the
temporality which we have now laid bare.
 

is  accessible 

to 

1.  ‘Zukunft,  Gewesenheit,  Gegenwart  zeigen  die  phänomenalen  Charaktere  des  “Auf-sich-zu”,

des “Zurück auf”, des “Begegnenlassens von”.’ On these expressions cf. H. 326 above.

2.  ‘Die  Phänomene  des  zu...,  auf...,  bei...  offenbaren  die  Zeitlichkeit  als  das  ἐκστατικόν
schlechthin. Zeitlichkeit ist das ursprüngliche “Ausser-sich” an und für sich selbst. Wir nennen daher
die charakterisierten Phänomene Zukunft, Gewesenheit, Gegenwart die Ekstasen der Zeitlichkeit.’

The Connection of the words ‘zu’, ‘auf’, and ‘bei’ with the expressions listed in the preceding
sentence, is somewhat obscure even in the German, and is best clarified by a study of the preceding
pages. Briefly the correlation seems to be as follows:

zu: Zukunft; auf sich zukommen; Auf-sich-zu; Sich-vorweg.
auf: Gewesenheit; zurückkommen auf; Zurück auf; Schon-sein-in.
bei: Gegenwart; Begegnenlassen von; Sein-bei.
The  root-meaning  of  the  word  ‘ecstasis’  (Greek  ἔκστασις;  German,  ‘Ekstase’)  is  ‘standing
outside’.  Used  generally  in  Greek  for  the  ‘removal’  or  ‘displacement’  of  something,  it  came  to  be
applied  to  states-of-mind  which  we  would  now  call  ‘ecstatic’.  Heidegger  usually  keeps  the  basic

root-meaning in mind, but he also is keenly aware of its close connection with the root-meaning of
the word ‘existence’.

In enumerating the ecstases, we have always mentioned the future first.
We have done this to indicate that the future has a priority in the ecstatical
unity  of  primordial  and  authentic  temporality.  This  is  so,  even  though
temporality  does  not  first  arise  through  a  cumulative  sequence  of  the
ecstases, but in each case temporalizes itself in their equiprimordiality. But
within this equiprimordiality, the modes of temporalizing are different. The
difference  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  nature  of  the  temporalizing  can  be
determined  primarily  in  terms  of  the  different  ecstases.  Primordial  and
authentic temporality temporalizes itself in terms of the authentic future and
in  such  a  way  that  in  having  been  futurally,  it  first  of  all  awakens  the
Present.(1)  The  primary  phenomenon  of  primordial  and  authentic
temporality is  the  future.  The  priority  of  the  future  will  vary  according  to
the  ways  in  which  the  temporalizing  of  inauthentic  temporality  itself  is
modified,  but  it  will  still  come  to  the  fore  even  in  the  derivative  kind  of
‘time’.(2)

H. 330

 

Care 

is  Being-towards-death.  We  have  defined  “anticipatory
resoluteness”  as  authentic  Being  towards  the  possibility  which  we  have
characterized as Dasein’s utter impossibility. In such Being-towards-its-end,
Dasein exists in a way which is authentically whole as that entity which it
can be when ‘thrown into death’. This entity does not have an end at which
it  just  stops,  but  it  exists  finitely.(3)  The  authentic  future  is  temporalized
primarily by that temporality which makes up the meaning of anticipatory
resoluteness; it thus reveals itself as finite.(4) But ‘does not time go on’ in
spite  of  my  own  no-longer-Dasein?(5)  And  can  there  not  be  an  unlimited
number of things which still lie ‘in the future’ and come along out of it?

We  must  answer  these  questions  affirmatively.  In  spite  of  this,  they  do
not  contain  any  objections  to  the  finitude  of  primordial  temporality—
because  this  is  something  which  is  no  longer  handled  by  these  at  all.  The
question  is  not  about  everything  that  still  can  happen  ‘in  a  time  that  goes
on’, or about what kind of letting-come-towards-oneself we can encounter
‘out of this time’, but about how “coming-towards-oneself” is, as such, to

be  primordially  defined.  Its  finitude  does  not  amount  primarily  to  a
stopping, but is a characteristic of temporalization itself. The primordial and
authentic  future  is  the  “towards-oneself”  (to  oneself!),(6)  existing  as  the
possibility of nullity, the possibility which is not to be outstripped.
 

1. ‘…dass sie zukünftig gewesen allererst die Gegenwart weckt.’
2. ‘…noch in der abkünftigen “Zeit”.’ Here Heidegger is contrasting the authentic kind of time in
which  Dasein  ‘comes  towards’  itself  futurally  [‘auf  sich  zukommt  zukünftig’]  with  the  inauthentic
kind of time which ‘comes off’ from this or is ‘derived’ from it [‘abkommt’], and which is thus of a
‘derivative’ [‘abkünftig’] character.
3. ‘…sondern existiert endlich.’
4.  ‘Die  eigentliche  Zukunft,  die  primär  die  Zeitlichkeit  zeitigt,  die  den  Sinn  der  vorlaufenden

Entschlossenheit ausmacht, enthüllt sich damit selbst als endliche.’

5. ‘Allein “geht” trotz des Nichtmehrdaseins meiner selbst “die Zeit nicht weiter”?’
6. ‘…das Auf-sich-zu, auf sich...’

The ecstatical character of the primordial future lies precisely in the fact
that the future closes one’s potentiality-for-Being; that is to say, the future
itself  is  closed  to  one,(1)  and  as  such  it  makes  possible  the  resolute
existentiell  understanding  of  nullity.  Primordial  and  authentic  coming-
towards-oneself is the meaning of existing in one’s ownmost nullity. In our
thesis that temporality is primordially finite, we are not disputing that ‘time
goes  on’;  we  are  simply  holding  fast  to  the  phenomenal  character  of
primordial temporality—a character which shows itself in what is projected
in Dasein’s primordial existential projecting.

The temptation to overlook the finitude of the primordial and authentic
future and therefore the finitude of temporality, or alternatively, to hold ‘a
priori’ that  such  finitude  is  impossible,  arises  from  the  way  in  which  the
ordinary  understanding  of  time  is  constantly  thrusting  itself  to  the  fore.  If
the ordinary understanding is right in knowing a time which is endless, and
in  knowing  only  this,  it  has  not  yet  been  demonstrated  that  it  also
understands  this  time  and  its  ‘infinity’.  What  does  it  mean  to  say,  ‘Time
goes  on’  or  ‘Time  keep  passing  away?’  What  is  the  signification  of  ‘in
time’  in  general,  and  of  the  expressions  ‘in  the  future’  and  ‘out  of  the
future’ in particular? In what sense is ‘time’ endless? Such points need to be
cleared up, if the ordinary objections to the finitude of primordial time are
not to remain groundless. But we can clear them up effectively only if we
have  obtained  an  appropriate  way  of  formulating  the  question  as  regards
finitude and in-finitude.(2) Such a formulation, however, arises only if we
view the  primordial phenomenon  of time  understandingly.  The problem  is

not one of how(3) the ‘derived’ [“abgeleitete”] infinite  time,  ‘in  which the
ready-to-hand  arises  and  passes  away,  becomes  primordial 
finite
temporality; the problem is rather that of how inauthentic temporality arises
out  of  finite  authentic  temporality,  and  how  inauthentic  temporality,  as
inauthentic,  temporalizes  an  in-finite  time  out  of  the  finite.  Only  because
primordial time is finite can the ‘derived’ time temporalize itself as infinite.
In  the  order  in  which  we  get  things  into  our  grasp  through  the
understanding,  the  finitude  of  time  does  not  become  fully  visible  until  we
have exhibited ‘endless time’ so that these may be contrasted.
 

1. ‘…dass sie das Seinkönnen achliesst, das heisst selbst geschlossen ist...’ The verb ‘schliessen’,
as  here  used,  may  mean  either  to  close  or  shut,  or  to  conclude  or  bring  to  an  end.  Presumably  the
author has both senses in mind.

2. ‘…hinsichtlich der Endlichkeit und Un-endlichkeit...’ We have tried to preserve Heidegger’s
orthographic  distinction  between  ‘Unendlichkeit’  and  ‘Un-endlichkeit’  by  translating  the  former  as
‘infinity’,  the  latter  as  ‘in-finitude’.  We  shall  similarly  use  ‘infinite’  and  ‘in-finite’  for  ‘unendlich’
and ‘un-endlich’ respectively.

3. This word (‘wie’) is italicized only in the later editions.

H. 331

 

Our  analysis  of  primordial  temporality  up  to  this  point  may  be
summarized in the following theses. Time is primordial as the temporalizing
of  temporality,  and  as  such  it  makes  possible  the  Constitution  of  the
structure  of  care.  Temporality 
is  essentially  ecstatical.  Temporality
temporalizes itself primordially out of the future. Primordial time is finite.

However,  the  Interpretation  of  care  as  temporality  cannot  remain
restricted to the narrow basis obtained so far, even if it has taken us the first
steps along our way in viewing Dasein’s primordial and authentic Being-a-
whole.  The  thesis  that  the  meaning  of  Dasein  is  temporality  must  be
confirmed in the concrete content of this entity’s basic state, as it has been
set forth.

66.  Dasein’s  Temporality  and  the  Tasks  Arising  Therefrom  of

Repeating the Existential Analysis in a more Primordial Manner
 

Not only does the phenomenon of temporality which we have laid bare
demand  a  more  widely-ranging  confirmation  of  its  constitutive  power,  but

only through such confirmation will it itself come into view as regards the
basic possibilities of temporalizing. The demonstration of the possibility of
Dasein’s  state  of  Being  on  the  basis  of  temporality  will  be  designated  in
brief—though only provisionally—as “the ‘temporal’ Interpretation”.

H. 332

 

is 

the  authentic  mode  of  disclosedness, 

Our next task is to go beyond the temporal analysis of Dasein’s authentic
the
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole  and  a  general  characterization  of 
temporality of care so that Dasein’s inauthenticity may  be  made  visible  in
its own specific temporality. Temporality first showed itself in anticipatory
though
resoluteness.  This 
disclosedness  maintains  itself  for  the  most  part  in  the  inauthenticity  with
which the “they” fallingly interprets itself. In characterizing the temporality
of disclosedness in general, we are led to the temporal understanding of that
concernful Being-in-the-world which lies closest to us, and therefore of the
average  undifferentiatedness  of  Dasein  from  which  the  existential  analytic
first took its start.(xxiv) We have called Dasein’s average kind of Being, in
which it maintains itself proximally and for the most part, “everydayness”.
By  repeating  the  earlier  analysis,  we  must  reveal  everydayness  in  its
temporal  meaning,  so  that  the  problematic  included  in  temporality  may
come  to  light,  and  the  seemingly  ‘obvious’  character  of  the  preparatory
analyses may completely disappear. Indeed, confirmation is to be found for
temporality in all the essential structures of Dasein’s basic constitution. Yet
this  will  not  lead  to  running  through  our  analyses  again  superficially  and
schematically  in  the  same  sequence  of  presentation.  The  course  of  our
temporal  analysis  is  directed  otherwise:  it  is  to  make  plainer  the
interconnection of our earlier considerations and to do away with whatever
is accidental and seemingly arbitrary. Beyond these necessities of method,
however,  the  phenomenon  itself  gives  us  motives  which  compel  us  to
articulate our analysis in a different way when we repeat it.

The ontological structure of that entity which, in each case, I myself am,
centres  in  the  Self-subsistence  [Selbständigkeit]  of  existence.  Because  the
Self cannot be conceived either as substance or as subject but is grounded in
existence,  our  analysis  of  the  inauthentic  Self,  the  “they”,  has  been  left
wholly  in  tow  of  the  preparatory  Interpretation  of  Dasein.(xxv)  Now  that
Selfhood  has  been  explicitly  taken  back  into  the  structure  of  care,  and

importance  of 

therefore  of  temporality,  the  temporal  Interpretation  of  Self-constancy  and
non-Self-constancy(1)  acquires  an 
its  own.  This
Interpretation  needs  to  be  carried  through  separately  and  thematically.
However,  it  not  only  gives  us  the  right  kind  of  insurance  against  the
paralogisms  and  against  ontologically  inappropriate  questions  about  the
Being of the “I” in general, but it provides at the same time, in accordance
with its central function, a more primordial insight into the temporalization-
structure of temporality, which reveals itself as the historicality of Dasein.
The  proposition,  “Dasein  is  historical”,  is  confirmed  as  a  fundamental
existential  ontological  assertion.  This  assertion  is  far  removed  from  the
mere  ontical  establishment  of  the  fact  that  Dasein  occurs  in  a  ‘world-
history’.  But  the  historicality  of  Dasein  is  the  basis  for  a  possible  kind  of
historiological understanding which in turn carries with it the possibility of
getting a special grasp of the development of historiology as a science.
 

xxiv. Cf. Section 9, H. 43.
xxv. Cf. Sections 25 ff., H. 113 ff.

H. 333

 

By Interpreting everydayness and historicality temporally we shall get a
steady enough view of primordial time to expose it as the condition which
makes the everyday experience of time both possible and necessary. As an
entity  for  which  its  Being  is  an  issue,  Dasein  utilizes  itself  primarily  for
itself [verwendet sich... für sich selbst], whether it does so explicitly or not.
Proximally  and  for  the  most  part,  care  is  circumspective  concern.  In
utilizing  itself  for  the  sake  of  itself,  Dasein  ‘uses  itself  up’.  In  using  itself
up,  Dasein  uses  itself—that  is  to  say,  its  time.(2)  In  using  time,  Dasein
reckons  with  it.  Time  is  first  discovered  in  the  concern  which  reckons
circumspectively,  and  this  concern  leads  to  the  development  of  a  time-
reckoning.  Reckoning  with  time  is  constitutive  for  Being-in-the-world.
Concernful circumspective discovering, in reckoning with its time, permits
those  things  which  we  have  discovered,  and  which  are  ready-to-hand  or
present-at-hand,  to  be  encountered  in  time.  Thus  entities  within-the-world
become  accessible  as  ‘being  in  time’.  We  call  the  temporal  attribute  of
entities within-the-world “within-time-ness” [die Inner zeitkeit]. The kind of
‘time’ which is first found ontically in within-time-ness, becomes the basis

on which the ordinary traditional conception of time takes form. But time,
as  within-time-ness,  arises  from  an  essential  kind  of  temporalizing  of
primordial temporality. The fact that this is its source, tells us that the time
‘in  which’  what  is  present-at-hand  arises  and  passes  away,  is  a  genuine
phenomenon of time; it is not an externalization of a ‘qualitative time’ into
space,  as  Bergson’s  Interpretation  of  time—which  is  ontologically  quite
indefinite and inadequate—would have us believe.
 

1. ‘…Selbst-ständigkeit und Unselbst-ständigkeit...’ Cf. note 2, H. 322.
2. ‘Umwillen seiner selbst verwendend, “verbraucht” sich das Dasein. Sichverbruchend braucht
das  Dasein  sich  selbst,  dass  heisst  seine  Zeit.’  Here  three  verbs,  all  of  which  might  sometimes  be
translated  as  ‘use’,  are  contrasted  rather  subtly.  ‘Verwenden’  means  literally  to  ‘turn  something
away’, but is often used in the sense of ‘turning something to account’, ‘utilizing it’; in a reflexive
construction such as we have here, it often takes on the more special meaning of ‘applying oneself’
on  someone’s  behalf.  (In  previous  passages  we  have  generally  translated  ‘verwenden’  as  ‘use’.)
‘Verbrauchen’ means to ‘consume’ or ‘use up’. ‘Brauchen’ too means to ‘use’; but it also means to
‘need’, and it is hard to tell which of these senses Heidegger here has in mind.

In working out the temporality of Dasein as everydayness, historicality,
and  within-time-ness,  we  shall  be  getting  for  the  first  time  a  relentless
insight  into  the  complications  of  a  primordial  ontology  of  Dasein.  As
Being-in-the-world,  Dasein  exists  factically  with  and  alongside  entities
which  it  encounters  within-the-world.  Thus  Dasein’s  Being  becomes
ontologically  transparent  in  a  comprehensive  way  only  within  the
horizon(1) in which the Being of entities other than Dasein—and this means
even of those which are neither ready-to-hand nor present-at-hand but just
‘subsist’—has  been  clarified.  But  if  the  variations  of  Being  are  to  be
Interpreted  for  everything  of  which  we  say,  “It  is”,  we  need  an  idea  of
Being in general, and this idea needs to have been adequately illumined in
advance. So long as this idea is one at which we have not yet arrived, then
the  temporal  analysis  of  Dasein,  even  if  we  repeat  it,  will  remain
incomplete and fraught with obscurities; we shall not go on to talk about the
objective difficulties. The existential-temporal analysis of Dasein demands,
for  its  part,  that  it  be  repeated  anew  within  a  framework  in  which  the
concept of Being is discussed in principle.
 

1. ‘Das Sein des Daseins empfängt daher seine umfassende ontologische Durchsichtigkeit erst im

Horizont…’ In the older editions ‘erst’ appears after ‘daher’ rather than after ‘Durchsichtigkeit’.

IV: TEMPORALITY AND EVERYDAYNESS

 

 

67.  The  Basic  Content  of  Dasein’s  Existential  Constitution,  and  a

Preliminary Sketch of the Temporal Interpretation of it
 

H. 334

OUR  preparatory  analysis(i)  has  made  accessible  a  multiplicity  of
phenomena;  and  no  matter  how  much  we  may  concentrate  on  the
foundational structural totality of care, these must not be allowed to vanish
from  our  phenomenological  purview.  Far  from  excluding  such  a
multiplicity,  the  primordial totality  of  Dasein’s  constitution  as  articulated
demands it. The primordiality of a state of Being does not coincide with the
simplicity and uniqueness of an ultimate structural element. The ontological
source of Dasein’s Being is not ‘inferior’ to what springs from it, but towers
above it in power from the outset; in the field of ontology, any ‘springing-
from’ is degeneration. If we penetrate to the ‘source’ ontologically, we do
not  come  to  things  which  are  ontically  obvious  for  the  ‘common
understanding’; but the questionable character of everything obvious opens
up for us.

If  we  are  to  bring  back  into  our  phenomenological  purview  the
phenomena  at  which  we  have  arrived  in  our  preparatory  analysis,  an
allusion to the stages through which we have passed must be sufficient. Our
definition of “care” emerged from our analysis of the disclosedness which
constitutes  the  Being  of  the  ‘there’.  The  clarification  of  this  phenomenon
signified  that  we  must  give  a  provisional  Interpretation  of  Being-in-the-
world—the  basic  state  of  Dasein.  Our  investigation  set  out  to  describe
Being-in-the-world, so that from the beginning we could secure an adequate
phenomenological  horizon  as  opposed  to  those  inappropriate  and  mostly
inexplicit  ways  in  which  the  nature  of  Dasein  has  been  determined
beforehand  ontologically.  Being-in-the-world  was  first  characterized  with
regard  to  the  phenomenon  of  the  world.  And  in  our  explication  this  was

done  by  characterizing  ontico-ontologically  what  is  ready-to-hand  and
present-at-hand ‘in’ the  environment,  and  then  bringing  within-the-world-
ness  into  relief,  so  that  by  this  the  phenomenon  of  worldhood  in  general
to
could  be  made  visible.  But  understanding  belongs  essentially 
disclosedness; and the structure of worldhood, significance, turned out to be
bound up with that upon which understanding projects itself—namely that
potentiality-for-Being for the sake of which Dasein exists.
 

i. Cf. Division One, H. 41-230.

H. 335

 

The  temporal  Interpretation  of  everyday  Dasein  must  start  with  those
structures in which disclosedness constitutes itself: understanding, state-of-
mind, falling, and discourse. The modes in which temporality temporalizes
are to be laid bare with regard to these phenomena, and will give us a basis
for defining the temporality of Being-in-the-world. This leads us back to the
phenomenon  of  the  world,  and  permits  us  to  delimit  the  specifically
temporal  problematic  of  worldhood.  This  must  be  confirmed  by
characterizing  that  kind  of  Being-in-the-world  which  in  an  everyday
manner  is  closest  to  us—circumspective,  falling  concern.  The  temporality
of this concern makes it possible for circumspection to be modified into a
perceiving  which  looks  at  things,  and  the  theoretical  cognition  which  is
grounded  in  such  perceiving.  The  temporality  of  Being-in-the-world  thus
emerges,  and  it  turns  out,  at  the  same  time,  to  be  the  foundation  for  that
spatiality  which  is  specific  for  Dasein.  We  must  also  show  the  temporal
Constitution  of  deseverance  and  directionality.  Taken  as  a  whole,  these
analyses  will  reveal  a  possibility  for  the  temporalizing  of  temporality  in
which Dasein’s inauthenticity is ontologically grounded; and they will lead
us  face  to  face  with  the  question  of  how  the  temporal  character  of
everydayness—the temporal meaning of the phrase ‘proximally and for the
most  part’,  which  we  have  been  using  constantly  hitherto—is  to  be
understood.  By  fixing  upon  this  problem  we  shall  have  made  it  plain  that
the  clarification  of  this  phenomenon  which  we  have  so  far  attained  is
insufficient, and we shall have shown the extent of this insufficiency.

The  present  chapter  is  thus  divided  up  as  follows:  the  temporality  of
disclosedness in general (Section 68); the temporality of Being-in-the-world

 

 

 

and  the  problem  of  transcendence  (Section  69);  the  temporality  of  the
spatiality  characteristic  of  Dasein  (Section  70);  the  temporal  meaning  of
Dasein’s everydayness (Section 71).

68. The Temporality of Disclosedness in General

Resoluteness,  which  we  have  characterized  with  regard  to  its  temporal
meaning, represents an authentic disclosedness of Dasein—a disclosedness
which constitutes an entity of such a kind that in existing, it can be its very
‘there’.  Care  has  been  characterized  with  regard  to  its  temporal  meaning,
but only in its basic features. To exhibit its concrete temporal Constitution,
means to give a temporal Interpretation of the items of its structure, taking
them  each  singly:  understanding,  state-of-mind,  falling,  and  discourse.
Every understanding has its mood. Every state-of-mind is one in which one
understands. The understanding which one has in such a state-of-mind has
the  character  of  falling.  The  understanding  which  has  its  mood  attuned  in
falling, Articulates itself with relation to its intelligibility in discourse. The
current temporal Constitution of these phenomena leads back in each case
to  that  one  kind  of  temporality  which  serves  as  such  to  guarantee  the
possibility  that  understanding,  state-of-mind,  falling,  and  discourse,  are
united in their structure.(1)

(a) The Temporality of Understanding

ii. Cf. Section 31, H. 142 ff.

H. 336

With  the  term  “understanding”  we  have  in  mind  a  fundamental
existentiale, which  is  neither  a  definite  species  of  cognition distinguished,
let  us  say,  from  explaining  and  conceiving,  nor  any  cognition  at  all  in  the
sense of grasping something thematically. Understanding constitutes rather
the  Being  of  the  “there”  in  such  a  way  that,  on  the  basis  of  such
understanding, a Dasein can, in existing, develop the different possibilities
of  sight,  of  looking  around  [Sichumsehens],  and  of  just  looking.  In  all

that  which  one  cannot
explanation  one  uncovers  understandingly 
understand;  and  all  explanation  is  thus  rooted  in  Dasein’s  primary
understanding.

If  the  term  “understanding”  is  taken  in  a  way  which  is  primordially
existential, it means to be projecting(2) towards a potentiality-for-Being for
the sake of which any Dasein exists.
 

1.  ‘Die  jeweilige  zeitliche  Konstitution  der  genannten  Phänomene  führt  je  auf  die  eine
Zeitlichkeit  zurück,  als  welche  sie  die  mögliche  Struktureinheit  von  Verstehen,  Befindlichkeit,
Verfallen und Rede verbürgt.’ The older editions omit the pronoun ‘sie’.

2. ‘…entwerfend-sein...’ The older editions have ‘...e n t w e r f e n d S e i n…’

In understanding, one’s own potentiality-for-Being is disclosed in such a
way that one’s Dasein always knows understandingly what it is capable of.
It  ‘knows’  this,  however,  not  by  having  discovered  some  fact,  but  by
maintaining itself in an existentiell possibility. The kind of ignorance which
corresponds  to  this,  does  not  consist  in  an  absence  or  cessation  of
understanding,  but  must  be  regarded  as  a  deficient  mode  of  the
can  be
projectedness  of  one’s  potentiality-for-Being.  Existence 
questionable.  If  it  is  to  be  possible  for  something  ‘to  be  in  question’  [das
“In-Frage-stehcn”],  a  disclosedness  is  needed.  When  one  understands
oneself  projectively  in  an  existentiell  possibility,  the  future  underlies  this
understanding,  and  it  does  so  as  a  coming-towards-oneself  out  of  that
current  possibility  as  which  one’s  Dasein  exists.  The  future  makes
ontologically  possible  an  entity  which  is  in  such  a  way  that  it  exists
understandingly in its potentiality-for-Being. Projection is basically futural;
it  does  not  primarily  grasp  the  projected  possibility  thematically  just  by
having  it  in  view,  but  it  throws  itself  into  it  as  a  possibility.  In  each  case
Dasein  is  understandingly  in  the  way  that  it  can  be.(1)  Resoluteness  has
turned  out  to  be  a  kind  of  existing  which  is  primordial  and  authentic.
Proximally and for the most part, to be sure, Dasein remains irresolute; that
is  to  say,  it  remains  closed  off  in  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being,  to
which it brings itself only when it has been individualized. This implies that
temporality  does  not  temporalize  itself  constantly  out  of  the  authentic
future.  This  inconstancy,  however,  does  not  mean  that  temporality
sometimes  lacks  a  future,  but  rather  that  the  temporalizing  of  the  future
takes various forms.

H. 337

 

To designate the authentic future terminologically we have reserved the
expression “anticipation”. This indicates that Dasein, existing authentically,
lets  itself  come  towards  itself  as  its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being—that
the  future  itself  must  fist  win  itself,  not  from  a  Present,  but  from  the
inauthentic future. If we are to provide a formally undifferentiated term for
the  future,  we  may  use  the  one  with  which  we  have  designated  the  first
is
structural 
constantly  ahead  of  itself,  but  inconstantly  anticipatory  with  regard  to  its
existentiell possibility.

item  of  care—the  “ahead-of-itself”.  Factically,  Dasein 

How  is  the  inauthentic  future  to  be  contrasted  with  this?  Just  as  the
authentic  future  is  revealed  in  resoluteness,  the  inauthentic  future,  as  an
ecstatical mode, can reveal itself only if we go back ontologically from the
inauthentic  understanding  of  everyday  concern  to  its  existential-temporal
meaning. As care, Dasein is essentially ahead of itself. Proximally and for
the most part, concernful Being-in-the-world understands itself in terms of
that with which it is concerned. Inauthentic understanding(2) projects itself
upon  that  with  which  one  can  concern  oneself;  or  upon  what  is  feasible,
urgent, or indispensable in our everyday business. But that with which we
concern ourselves is as it is for the sake of that potentiality-for-Being which
cares.  This  potentiality  lets  Dasein  come  towards  itself  in  its  concernful
Being-alongside  that  with  which  it  is  concerned.  Dasein  does  not  come
towards  itself  primarily  in  its  ownmost  non-relational  potentiality-for-
Being, but it awaits this concernfully in terms of that which yields or denies
the  object  of  its  concern.(3)  Dasein  comes  towards  itself  from  that  with
which  it  concerns  itself.  The  inauthentic  future  has  the  character  of
awaiting.(4) One’s concernful understanding of oneself as they-self in terms
of what one does, has its possibility ‘based’ upon this ecstatical mode of the
future.  And  only  because factical  Dasein  is  thus  awaiting  its  potentiality-
for-Being,  and  is  awaiting  this  potentiality  in  terms  of  that  with  which  it
concerns itself, can it expect anything and wait for it [erwarten und  warten
auf...]. In each case some sort of awaiting must have disclosed the horizon
and the range from which something can be expected. Expecting is founded
upon  awaiting,  and  is  a  mode  of  that  future  which  temporalizes  itself
authentically  as  anticipation.  Hence  there  lies  in  anticipation  a  more
primordial Being-towards-death than in the concernful expecting of it.

1. ‘Verstehend ist das Dasein je, wie es sein kann.’
2. ‘Das uneigentliche Verstehen...’ Italics only in the later editions.
3. ‘...sondern es ist besorgend seiner gewärtig aus dem, was das Besorgte ergibt oder versagt.’ It

is not clear whether ‘das Besorgte’ or ‘was’ is the subject of its clause.

4.  ‘…des  Gewärtigens.’  While  the  verb  ‘await’  has  many  advantages  as  an  approximation  to
‘gewärtigen’, it is a bit too colourless and fails to bring out the important idea of being prepared  to
reckon with that which one awaits.

 

 

H. 338

Understanding, as existing in the potentiality-for-Being, however it may
have been projected, is primarily futural. But it would not temporalize itself
if  it  were  not  temporal—that  is,  determined  with  equal  primordiality  by
having been and by the Present. The way in which the latter ecstasis helps
constitute  inauthentic  understanding,  has  already  been  made  plain  in  a
rough  and  ready  fashion.  Everyday  concern  understands  itself  in  terms  of
that  potentiality-for-Being  which  confronts  it  as  coming  from  its  possible
success  or  failure  with  regard  to  whatever  its  object  of  concern  may  be.
Corresponding to the inauthentic future (awaiting), there is a special way of
Being-alongside  the  things  with  which  one  concerns  oneself.  This  way  of
Being-alongside  is  the  Present—the  “waiting-towards”;(1)  this  ecstatical
mode reveals itself if we adduce for comparison this very same ecstasis, but
in  the  mode  of  authentic  temporality.  To  the  anticipation  which  goes  with
resoluteness, there belongs a Present in accordance with which a resolution
discloses the Situation. In resoluteness, the Present is not only brought back
from distraction with the objects of one’s closest concern, but it gets held in
the  future  and  in  having  been.  That  Present  which  is  held  in  authentic
temporality  and  which  thus  is  authentic  itself,  we  call  the  “moment  of
vision”.(2) This term must be understood in the active sense as an ecstasis.
It means the resolute rapture with which Dasein is carried away to whatever
possibilities and circumstances are encountered in the Situation as possible
objects  of  concern,  but  a  rapture  which  is  held  in  resoluteness.(3)  The
moment of vision is a phenomenon which in principle can not  be clarified
in  terms  of  the  “now” [dem Zetzt]. The  “now”  is  a  temporal  phenomenon
which belongs to time as within-time-ness: the “now” ‘in which’ something
arises, passes away, or is present-at-hand. ‘In the moment of vision’ nothing
can  occur;  but  as  an  authentic  Present  or  waiting-towards,  the  moment  of

vision permits us to encounter for the first time what can be ‘in a time’ as
ready-to-hand or present-at-hand.(iii)
 

iii. S. Kierkegaard is probably the one who has seen the existentiell phenomenon of the moment
of  vision  with  the  most  penetration;  but  this  does  not  signify  that  he  has  been  correspondingly
successful in Interpreting  it existentially. He clings to the ordinary  conception of time, and  defines
the  “moment  of  vision”  with  the  help  of  “now”  and  “eternity”.  When  Kierkegaard  speaks  of
‘temporality’,  what  he  has  in  mind  is  man’s  ‘Being-in-time’  [“In-der-Zeit-sein”].  Time  as  within-
time-ness knows  only the “now”;  it never  knows  a moment of vision. If, however, such a moment
gets experienced in an existentiell manner, then a more primordial temporality has been presupposed,
although  existentially  it  has  not  been  made  explicit.  On  the  ‘moment  of  vision’,  cf.  K.  Jaspers,
Psychologie der Weltanschauungen, third unaltered edition, 1925, pp. 108 ff., and further his ‘review
of Kierkegaard’ (ibid., pp. 419-432).
 

1. ‘Gegen-wart’. In this context it seems well to translate this expression by a hendiadys which,
like Heidegger’s hyphenation, calls attention to the root-meaning of the noun ‘Gegenwart’. See our
notes 2, H. 25 and 2, H. 26 above.
2. Cf. note 2, H. 328 above.
3. ‘Er meint die entschlossene, aber in der Erschlossenheit gehaltene Entrückung des Daseins an
das, was in der Situation an besorgbaren Möglichkeiten, Umständen begegnet.’ The verb ‘entrücken’
means  literally  ‘to  move  away’  or  ‘to  carry  away’,  but  it  has  also  taken  on  the  meaning  of  the
‘rapture’  in  which  one  is  ‘carried  away’  in  a  more  figurative  sense.  While  the  words  ‘Entrückung’
and ‘Ekstase’ can thus be used in many contexts as synonyms, for Heidegger the former seems the
more general. (See H. 365 below.) We shall translate ‘entrücken’ by ‘rapture’ or ‘carry away’, or, as
in this case, by a combination of these expressions.

In contradistinction to the moment of vision as the authentic Present, we
call  the  inauthentic  Present  “making present”. Formally  understood,  every
Present is one which makes present, but not every Present has the character
of  a  ‘moment  of  vision’.  When  we  use  the  expression  “making  present”
without  adding  anything  further,  we  always  have  in  mind  the  inauthentic
kind,  which  is  irresolute  and  does  not  have  the  character  of  a  moment  of
vision. Making-present will become clear only in the light of the temporal
Interpretation of falling into the ‘world’ of one’s concern; such falling has
its existential meaning in making present. But in so far as the potentiality-
for-Being  which  is  projected  by  inauthentic  understanding  is  projected  in
terms  of  things  with  which  one  can  be  concerned,  this  means  that  such
understanding temporalizes itself in terms of making present. The moment
of  vision,  however,  temporalizes  itself  in  quite  the  opposite  manner—in
terms of the authentic future.

H. 339

 

Inauthentic  understanding  temporalizes  itself  as  an  awaiting  which
makes  present  [gegenwärtigendes  Geswärtigen]—an  awaiting  to  whose
ecstatical  unity  there  must  belong  a  corresponding  “having  been”.  The
authentic  coming-towards-oneself  of  anticipatory  resoluteness  is  at  the
same  time  a  coming-back  to  one’s  ownmost  Self,  which  has  been  thrown
into  its  individualization.  This  ecstasis  makes  it  possible  for  Dasein  to  be
able  to  take  over  resolutely  that  entity  which  it  already  is.  In  anticipating,
Dasein brings itself again  forth  into its ownmost  potentiality-for-Being.  If
Being-as-having-been is authentic, we call it “repetition”.(1)
 

1.  ‘Im  Vorlaufen  holt  sich  das  Dasein  wieder  in  das  eigenste  Seinkönnen  vor.  Das  eigentliche

Gewesen-sein nennen wir die Wiederholung.’ On ‘Wiederholung’, see H. 385 and our note ad loc.

But when one projects oneself inauthentically towards those possibilities
which have been drawn from the object of concern in making it present, this
is possible only because Dasein has forgotten itself in  its ownmost thrown
potentiality-for-Being. This forgetting is not nothing, nor is it just a failure
to remember; it is rather a ‘positive’ ecstatical mode of one’s having been—
a mode with a character of its own. The ecstasis (rapture) of forgetting has
the character of backing away in the face of one’s ownmost “been”, and of
doing  so  in  a  manner  which  is  closed  off  from  itself—in  such  a  manner,
indeed,  that  this  backing-away  closes  off  ecstatically  that  in  the  face  of
which  one  is  backing  away,  and  thereby  closes  itself  off  too.(1)  Having
forgotten  [Vergessenheit]  as  an  inauthentic  way  of  having  been,  is  thus
related to that thrown Being which is one’s own; it is the temporal meaning
of that Being  in  accordance with  which I am  proximally  and for  the  most
part  as-having-been.  Only  on  the  basis  of  such  forgetting  can  anything  be
retained  [behalten]  by  the  concernful  making-present  which  awaits;  and
what  are  thus  retained  are  entities  encountered  within-the-world  with  a
character  other  than  that  of  Dasein.  To  such  retaining  there  corresponds  a
non-retaining  which presents us with  a kind  of ‘forgetting’ in  a derivative
sense.

Just as expecting is possible only on the basis of awaiting, remembering
is possible only on that of forgetting, and not  v i c e  v e r s a; for  in  the
mode  of  having-forgotten,  one’s  having  been  ‘discloses’  primarily  the
horizon  into  which  a  Dasein  lost  in  the  ‘superficiality’  of  its  object  of

concern,  can  bring  itself  by  remembering.(2)  The  awaiting  which  forgets
and makes present is an ecstatical unity in its own right, in accordance with
which  inauthentic  understanding  temporalizes  itself  with  regard  to  its
temporality.  The  unity  of  these  ecstases  closes  off  one’s  authentic
potentiality-for-Being,  and  is  thus  the  existential  condition  for  the
possibility  of  irresoluteness.  Though  inauthentic  concernful  understanding
determines  itself  in  the  light  of  making  present  the  object  of  concern,  the
temporalizing of the understanding is performed primarily in the future.
 

1.  ‘Die  Ekstase  (Entrückung)  des  Vergessens  hat  den  Charakter  des  sich  selbst  verschlossenen
Ausrückens vor dem eigensten Gewesen, so zwar, dass dieses Ausrücken vor... ekstatisch das Wover
verschliesst und in eins damit sich selbst.’ Heidegger is here connecting the word ‘Entrückung’ (our
‘rapture’) with the cognate verb ‘ausrücken’ (‘back away’), which may be used intransitively in the
military sense of ‘decamping’, but may also be used transitively in the sense of ‘disconnecting’. Both
‘entrücken’ and ‘ausrücken’ mean originally ‘to move away’, but they have taken on very different
connotations in ordinary German usage.

2.  ‘…denn  im  Modus  der  Vergessenheit  “erschliesst”  die  Gewesenheit  primär  den  Horizont,  in
den  hinein  das  an  die  “Äusserlichkeit”  des  Besorgten  verlorene  Dasein  sich  erinnern  kann.’  Here
there  is  presumably  a  deliberate  contrast  between  the  idea  of  externality  in  the  root  meaning  of
‘Äusserlichkeit’ (‘superficiality’) and the idea of putting oneself into something, which is the original
sense of ‘sich erinnern’ (‘to remember’). We have tried to bring this out by our rather free translation
of ‘...in den hinein... sich erinnern…’.

(b) The Temporality of State-of-mind

 

 

iv. Cf. Section 29, H. 134 ff.

H. 340

Understanding  is  never  free-floating,  but  always  goes  with  some  state-
of-mind.  The  “there”  gets  equiprimordially  disclosed  by  one’s  mood  in
every case—or gets closed off by it. Having a mood brings Dasein face to
face with its thrownness in such a manner that this thrownness is not known
as  such  but  disclosed  far  more  primordially  in  ‘how  one  is’.  Existentially,
“Being-thrown”  means  finding  oneself  in  some  state-of-mind  or  other.
One’s  state-of-mind  is  therefore  based  upon  thrownness.  My  mood
represents whatever may be the way in which I am primarily the entity that
has been thrown. How does the temporal Constitution of having-a-mood let
itself  be  made  visible?  How  will  the  ecstatical  unity  of  one’s  current

temporality  give  any  insight  into  the  existential  connection  between  one’s
state-of-mind and one’s understanding?

One’s  mood  discloses  in  the  manner  of  turning  thither  or  turning  away
from one’s own Dasein. Bringing Dasein face to face with the “that-it-is” of
its  own  thrownness—whether  authentically  revealing  it  or  inauthentically
covering  it  up—becomes  existentially  possible  only  if  Dasein’s  Being,  by
its very meaning, constantly is as having been. The “been” is not what first
brings one face to face with the thrown entity which one is oneself; but the
ecstasis of the “been” is what first makes it possible to find oneself in the
way of having a state-of-mind.(1)

temporalizes 

Understanding  is  grounded  primarily  in  the  future;  one’s state-of-mind,
in  having  been.(2)  Moods
however, 
temporalize  themselves—that  is,  their  specific  ecstasis  belongs  to  a  future
and a Present in such a way, indeed, that these equiprimordial ecstases are
modified by having been.

itself  primarily 

We  have  emphasized  that  while  moods,  of  course,  are  ontically  well-
known to us [bekannt], they are not recognized [erkannt] in their primordial
existential  function.  They  are  regarded  as  fleeting  Experiences  which
‘colour’ one’s whole ‘psychical condition’. Anything which is observed to
have  the  character  of  turning  up  and  disappearing  in  a  fleeting  manner,
belongs  to  the  primordial  constancy  of  existence.  But  all  the  same,  what
should moods have in common with ‘time’? That these ‘Experiences’ come
and  go,  that  they  run  their  course  ‘in  time’,  is  a  trivial  thing  to  establish.
Certainly.  And  indeed  this  can  be  established  in  an  ontico-psychological
manner. Our task, however, is to exhibit the ontological structure of having-
a-mood  in  its  existential-temporal  Constitution.  And  of  course  this  is
proximally  just  a  matter  of  first  making  the  temporality  of  moods  visible.
The thesis that ‘one’s state-of-mind is grounded primarily in having been’
means  that  the  existentially  basic  character  of  moods  lies  in  bringing  one
back to something. This bringing-back does not first produce a having been;
but  in  any  state-of-mind  some  mode  of  having  been  is  made  manifest  for
existential  analysis.(3)  So  if  we  are  to  Interpret  states-of-mind  temporally,
our aim is not one of deducing moods from temporality and dissolving them
into pure phenomena of temporalizing. All we have to do is to demonstrate
that except on the basis of temporality, moods are not possible in what they
‘signify’  in  an  existentiell  way  or  in  how  they  ‘signify’  it.  Our  temporal

Interpretation will restrict itself to the phenomena of fear and anxiety, which
we have already analysed in a preparatory manner.
 

1. ‘Das Bringen vor das geworfene Seiende, das man selbst ist, schafft nicht erst das Gewesen,
sondern  dessen  Ekstase  ermöglicht  erst  das  Sich-finden  in  der  Weise  des  Sichbefindens.’  We  have
construed ‘das Gewesen’ and ‘dessen Ekstase’ as the subjects of their respective clauses, but other
interpretations are not impossible.

2. In our italicization we follow the older editions. In the newer editions ‘Gewesenheit’ (‘having

been’) is not italicized.

3.  ‘Dieses  stellt  die  Gewesenheit  nicht  erst  her,  sondern  die  Befindlichkeit  offenbart  für  die
existenziale  Analyse  je  einen  Modus  der  Gewesenheit.’  The  grammar  of  the  first  clause  is
ambiguous.

H. 341

 

We shall begin our analysis by exhibiting the temporality of fear.(v) Fear
has been characterized as an inauthentic state-of-mind. To what extent does
the  existential  meaning  which  makes  such  a  state-of-mind  possible  lie  in
what  has  been?  Which  mode  of  this  ecstasis  designates  the  specific
temporality of fear? Fear is a fearing in the face of something threatening—
of  something  which  is  detrimental  to  Dasein’s  factical  potentiality-for-
Being, and which brings itself close in the way we have described, within
the  range  of  the  ready-to-hand  and  the  present-at-hand  with  which  we
concern ourselves. Fearing discloses something threatening, and it does so
by way of everyday circumspection. A subject which merely beholds would
never be able to discover anything of the sort. But if something is disclosed
when one fears in the face of it, is not this disclosure a letting-something-
come-towards-oneself  [ein  Auf-sich-zukommenlassen]?  Has  not  “fear”
been  rightly  defined  as  “the  expectation  of  some  oncoming  evil”  [eines
ankommenden  Übels]  (“malum futurum”)? Is  not  the  primary  meaning  of
fear  the  future,  and  least  of  all,  one’s  having  been?  Not  only  does  fearing
‘relate’ itself to ‘something future’ in the signification of something which
first  comes  on  ‘in  time’;  but  this  self-relating  is  itself  futural  in  the
primordially  temporal  sense.  All  this  is  incontestable.  Manifestly  an
awaiting  is  one  of  the  things  that  belong  to  the  existential-temporal
Constitution of fear. But proximally this just means that the temporality of
fear is one that is inauthentic. Is fearing in the face of something merely an
expecting  of  something  threatening  which  is  coming  on?  Such  an
expectation need not be fear already, and it is so far from being fear that the

specific character which fear as a mood possesses is missing. This character
lies in the fact that in fear the awaiting lets what is threatening come  back
[zurückkommen] to one’s factically concernful potentiality-for-Being. Only
if that to which this comes back is already ecstatically open, can that which
threatens be awaited right back to the entity which I myself am; only so can
my Dasein be threatened.(1)
 

v. Cf. Section 30, H. 140 ff.

1. ‘Zurück auf das Seiende, das ich bin, kann das Bedrohliche nur gewärtigt, und so das Dasein

bedroht werden, wenn das Worauf des Zurück auf... schon überhaupt ekstatisch offen ist.’

 

 

H. 342

The  awaiting  which  fears  is  one  which  is  afraid  ‘for  itself’;  that  is  to
say, fearing in the face of something, is in each case a fearing about; therein
lies the character of fear as mood and as affect.  When one’s Being-in-the-
world has been threatened and it concerns itself with  the  ready-to-hand,  it
does  so  as  a  factical  potentiality-for-Being  of  its  own.  In  the  face  of  this
potentiality  one  backs  away  in  bewilderment,  and  this  kind  of  forgetting
oneself  is  what  constitutes  the  existential-temporal  meaning  of  fear.(1)
Aristotle  rightly  defines  “fear”  as  λύπη  τις  ἢ  ταραχή—as  “a  kind  of
depression or bewilderment”.(vi) This depression forces Dasein back to its
thrownness,  but  in  such  a  way  that  this  thrownness  gets  quite  closed  off.
The bewilderment is based upon a forgetting. When one forgets and backs
away in the face of a factical potentiality-for-Being which is resolute, one
clings to those possibilities of self-preservation and evasion which one has
already discovered circumspectively beforehand. When concern is afraid, it
leaps from next to next, because it forgets itself and therefore does not take
hold of any definite possibility. Every ‘possible’ possibility offers itself, and
this means that the impossible ones do so too. The man who fears, does not
stop  with  any  of  these;  his  ‘environment’  does  not  disappear,  but  it  is
encountered  without  his  knowing  his  way  about  in  it  any  longer.(2)  This
bewildered making-present of the first thing that comes into one’s head, is
something that belongs with forgetting oneself in fear. It is well known, for
instance, that the inhabitants of a burning house will often ‘save’ the most
indifferent  things  that  are  most  closely  ready-to-hand.  When  one  has
forgotten oneself and makes present a jumble of hovering possibilities, one

 

 

thus  makes  possible  that  bewilderment  which  goes  to  make  up  the  mood-
character  of  fear.(3)  The  having  forgotten  which  goes  with  such
bewilderment  modifies  the  awaiting  too  and  gives  it  the  character  of  a
depressed  or  bewildered  awaiting  which  is  distinct  from  any  pure
expectation.
 

vi. Cf. Aristotle, Rhetorica B 5, 1382a 21.

1.  ‘Deren  existenzial-zeitlicher  Sinn  wird  konstituiert  durch  ein  Sichvergessen:  das  verwirrte
Ausrücken  vor  dem  eigenen  faktischen  Seinkönnen,  als  welches  das  bedrohte  In-der-Welt-sein  das
Zuhandene besorgt.’

2. ‘Bei keiner hält der Fürchtende, die “Umwelt” verschwindet nicht, sondern begegnet in einem

Sich-nicht-mehr-auskennen in ihr.’

3.  ‘Das  selbstvergessene  Gegenwärtigen  eines  Gewirrs  von  schwebenden  Möglichkeiten
ermöglicht  die  Verwirrung,  als  welche  sie  den  Stimmungscharakter  der  Furcht  ausmacht.’  The
pronoun ‘sie’ does not appear in the older editions.

The specific ecstatical unity which makes it existentially possible to be
afraid,  temporalizes  itself  primarily  out  of  the  kind  of  forgetting
characterized above, which, as a mode of having been, modifies its Present
and  its  future  in  their  own  temporalizing.  The  temporality  of  fear  is  a
forgetting  which  awaits  and  makes  present.  The  common-sense
interpretation of fear, taking its orientation from what we encounter within-
the-world, seeks in the first instance to designate the ‘oncoming evil’ as that
in the face of which we fear, and, correspondingly, to define our relation to
this  evil  as  one  of  “expecting”.  Anything  else  which  belongs  to  the
phenomenon remains a ‘feeling of pleasure or displeasure’.

H. 343

How is the temporality of anxiety related to that of fear? We have called
the  phenomenon  of  anxiety  a  basic  state-of-mind.(vii)  Anxiety  brings
Dasein  face  to  face  with  its  ownmost  Being-thrown  and  reveals  the
uncanniness of everyday familiar Being-in-the-world. Anxiety, like fear, has
its character formally determined by something in the face of which one is
anxious  and  something  about which  one  is  anxious.  But  our  analysis  has
shown  that  these  two  phenomena  coincide.  This  does  not  mean  that  their
structural  characters  are  melted  away  into  one  another,  as  if  anxiety  were
anxious neither in the face of anything nor about anything. Their coinciding

means rather that the entity by which both these structures are filled in [das
sie  erfüllende  Seiende]  is  the  same—namely  Dasein.  In  particular,  that  in
the face of which one has anxiety is not encountered as something definite
with  which  one  can  concern  oneself;  the  threatening  does  not  come  from
what  is  ready-to-hand  or  present-at-hand,  but  rather  from  the  fact  that
neither  of  these  ‘says’  anything  any  longer.  Environmental  entities  no
longer  have  any  involvement.  The  world  in  which  I  exist  has  sunk  into
insignificance;  and  the  world  which  is  thus  disclosed  is  one  in  which
entities  can  be  freed  only  in  the  character  of  having  no  involvement.
Anxiety is anxious in the face of the “nothing” of the world; but this does
not mean that in anxiety we experience something like the absence of what
is  present-at-hand  within-the-world.  The  present-at-hand  must  be
encountered  in  just  such  a  way  that  it  does  not  have  any  involvement
whatsoever,  but  can  show  itself  in  an  empty  mercilessness.  This  implies,
however,  that  our  concernful  awaiting  finds  nothing  in  terms  of  which  it
might be able to understand itself; it clutches at the “nothing” of the world;
but when our understanding has come up against the world, it is brought to
Being-in-the-world  as  such  through  anxiety.  Being-in-the  world,  however,
is both what anxiety is anxious in-the-face-of and what it is anxious about.
To be anxious in-the-face-of... does not have the character of an expecting
or  of  any  kind  of  awaiting.  That  in-the-face-of  which  one  has  anxiety  is
indeed already ‘there’—namely, Dasein itself. In that case, does not anxiety
get  constituted by a future? Certainly;  but  not  by  the  inauthentic  future of
awaiting.

Anxiety discloses an insignificance of the world; and this insignificance
reveals the nullity of that with which one can concern oneself—or, in other
words, the impossibility of projecting oneself upon a potentiality-for-Being
which  belongs  to  existence  and  which  is  founded  primarily  upon  one’s
objects  of  concern.  The  revealing  of  this  impossibility,  however,  signifies
that one is letting the possibility of an authentic potentiality-for-Being be lit
up.  What  is  the  temporal  meaning  of  this  revealing?  Anxiety  is  anxious
about naked Dasein as something that has been thrown into uncanniness. It
brings  one  back  to  the  pure  “that-it-is”  of  one’s  ownmost  individualized
thrownness.  This  bringing-back  has  neither  the  character  of  an  evasive
forgetting  nor  that  of  a  remembering.  But  just  as  little  does  anxiety  imply
that  one  has  already  taken  over  one’s  existence  into  one’s  resolution  and
done  so  by  a  repeating.  On  the  contrary,  anxiety  brings  one  back  to  one’s

thrownness as something possible which can be repeated. And in  this way
it  also  reveals  the  possibility  of  an  authentic  potentiality-for-Being—a
potentiality which must, in repeating, come back to its thrown “there”, but
come  back  as  something  futural  which  comes  towards  [zukünftiges].  The
character of having been is constitutive for the state-of-mind of anxiety; and
bringing one face to face with repeatability is the specific ecstatical mode of
this character.
 

vii. Cf. Section 40, H. 184 ff.

H. 344

 

The forgetting which is constitutive for fear, bewilders Dasein and lets it
drift back and forth between ‘worldly’ possibilities which it has not seized
upon. In contrast to this making-present which is not held on to, the Present
of  anxiety  is  held  on  to  when  one  brings  oneself  back  to  one’s  ownmost
thrownness.  The  existential  meaning  of  anxiety  is  such  that  it  cannot  lose
itself in something with which it might be concerned. If anything like this
happens  in  a  similar  state-of-mind,  this  is  fear,  which  the  everyday
understanding  confuses  with  anxiety.  But  even  though  the  Present  of
anxiety is held on to, it does not as yet have the character of the moment of
vision, which temporalizes itself in a resolution. Anxiety merely brings one
into  the  mood  for  a  possible resolution.  The  Present  of  anxiety  holds  the
moment of vision at the ready [auf dem Sprung]; as such a moment it itself,
and only itself, is possible.

The  temporality  of  anxiety  is  peculiar;  for  anxiety  is  grounded
primordially  in  having  been,  and  only  out  of  this  do  the  future  and  the
Present temporalize themselves; in this peculiar temporality is demonstrated
the possibility of that power which is distinctive for the mood of anxiety. In
this, Dasein is taken all the way back to its naked uncanniness, and becomes
fascinated  by  it.(1)  This  fascination,  however,  not  only  takes  Dasein  back
from its ‘worldly’ possibilities, but at the same time gives it the possibility
of an authentic potentiality-for-Being.
 

1.  ‘An  der  eigentümlichen  Zeitlichkeit  der  Angst,  dass  sie  ursprünglich  in  der  Gewesenheit
gründet  und  aus  ihr  erst  Zukunft  und  Gegenwart  sich  zeitigen,  erweist  sich  die  Mögichkeit  der
Mächtigkeit,  durch  die  sich  die  Stimmung  der  Angst  auszeichnet.  In  ihr  ist  das  Dasein  völlig  auf
seine nackte Unheimlichkeit zurückgenommen und von ihr benommen.’ In these two sentences there

are no less than six feminine nouns which might serve as the antecedents of the pronouns ‘sie’ and
‘ihr’ in their several appearances. We have chosen the interpretation which seems most plausible to
us,  but  others  are  perhaps  no 
less  defensible.  The  etymological  connection  between
‘zurückgenommen’ (‘taken… back’) and ‘benommen’ (‘fascinated’) does not show up in the English
version; it is obviously deliberate, and it gets followed up in the next sentence.

Yet neither of these moods, fear and anxiety, ever ‘occurs’ just isolated
in  the  ‘stream of Experiences’; each of them determines  an understanding
or determines itself in terms of one.(1) Fear is occasioned by entities with
which  we  concern  ourselves  environmentally.  Anxiety,  however,  springs
from Dasein itself. When fear assails us, it does so from what is within-the-
world. Anxiety arises out of Being-in-the-world as thrown Being-towards-
death.  When  understood  temporally,  this  ‘mounting’  of  anxiety  out  of
Dasein,  means  that  the  future  and  the  Present  of  anxiety  temporalize
themselves  out  of  a  primordial  Being-as-having-been  in  the  sense  of
bringing us back to repeatability. But anxiety can mount authentically only
in  a  Dasein  which  is  resolute.  He  who  is  resolute  knows  no  fear;  but  he
understands  the  possibility  of  anxiety  as  the  possibility  of  the  very  mood
which  neither  inhibits  nor  bewilders  him.  Anxiety  liberates  him  from
possibilities which ‘count for  nothing’  [“nichtigen”], and lets  him become
free for those which are authentic.

H. 345

 

Although both fear and anxiety, as modes of state-of-mind, are grounded
primarily  in  having  been, they  each  have  different  sources  with  regard  to
their own temporalization in the temporality of care. Anxiety springs from
the future of resoluteness, while fear springs from the lost Present, of which
fear is fearfully apprehensive, so that it falls prey to it more than ever.(2)
 

1.  ‘Beide  Stimmungen,  Furcht  und  Angst,  “kommen”  jedoch  nie  nur  isoliert  “vor”  im
“Erlebnisstrom”,  sondern  be-stimmen  je  ein  Verstehen,  bzw.  sich  aus  einem  solchen.’  Heidegger
writes  ‘be-stimmen’  with  a  hyphen  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  words  ‘bestimmen’
(‘determine’) and ‘Stimmung’ (‘mood’) have a common stem.

2.  ‘Die  Angst  entspringt  aus  der  Zukunft  der  Entschlossenheit,  die  Furcht  aus  der  verlorenen
Gegenwart, die furchtsam die Furcht befürchtet, um ihr so erst recht zu verfallen.’ The grammar of
this passage is ambiguous, and would also permit us to write: ‘…the lost Present, which is fearfully
apprehensive of fear, so that…’

But may not the thesis of the temporality of moods hold only for those
phenomena  which  we  have  selected  for  our  analysis?  How  is  a  temporal
meaning to be found in the pallid lack of mood which dominates the ‘grey
everyday’  through  and  through?  And  how  about  the  temporality  of  such
moods  and  affects  as  hope,  joy,  enthusiasm,  gaiety?  Not  only  fear  and
anxiety, but other moods, are founded existentially upon one’s having been;
this  becomes  plain  if  we  merely  mention  such  phenomena  as  satiety,
sadness, melancholy, and desperation. Of course these must be Interpreted
on the broader basis of an existential analytic of Dasein that has been well
worked out. But even a phenomenon like hope, which seems to be founded
wholly  upon  the  future,  must  be  snalysed  in  much  the  same  way  as  fear.
Hope  has  sometimes  been  characterized  as  the  expectation  of  a  bonum
futurum, to distinguish it from fear, which relates itself to a malum futurum.
But  what  is  decisive  for  the  structure  of  hope  as  a  phenomenon,  is  not  so
much  the  ‘futural’ character of that to  which it  relates  itself  but  rather  the
existential meaning of hoping itself. Even here its character as a mood lies
primarily in hoping as hoping for something for oneself [Für-sich-erhoffen].
He who hopes takes himself with him into his hope, as it were, and brings
himself  up  against  what  he  hopes  for.  But  this  presupposes  that  he  has
somehow  arrived  at  himself.  To  say  that  hope  brings  alleviation
[erleichtert] from depressing misgivings, means merely that even hope, as a
state-of-mind,  is  still  related  to  our  burdens,  and  related  in  the  mode  of
Being-as-having been. Such a mood of elation—or better, one which elates
—is ontologically possible only if Dasein has an ecstatico-temporal relation
to the thrown ground of itself.

Furthermore,  the  pallid  lack  of  mood—indifference—which  is  addicted
to  nothing  and  has  no  urge  for  anything,  and  which  abandons  itself  to
whatever the day may bring, yet in so doing takes everything along with it
in  a  certain  manner,  demonstrates  most  penetratingly  the  power  of
forgetting in the everyday mode of that concern which is closest to us. Just
living along [Das Dahinleben] in a way which ‘lets’ everything ‘be’ as it is,
is  based  on  forgetting  and  abandoning  oneself  to  one’s  thrownness.  It  has
the ecstatical meaning of an inauthentic way of having been. Indifference,
which can go along with busying oneself head over heels, must be sharply
distinguished from equanimity. This latter mood springs from resoluteness,
which,  in  a  moment  of  vision,  looks  at(1)  those  Situations  which  are

 

 

 

possible  in  one’s  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole  as  disclosed  in  our
anticipation of [zum] death.

H. 346

Only an entity which, in accordance with the meaning of its Being, finds
itself  in  a  state-of-mind  [sich  befindet]—that  is  to  say,  an  entity,  which  in
existing, is as already having been, and which exists in a constant mode of
what  has  been—can  become  affected.  Ontologically  such  affection
presupposes  making-present,  and  indeed  in  such  a  manner  that  in  this
making-present Dasein can be brought back to itself as something that has
been. It remains a problem in itself to define ontologically the way in which
the senses can be stimulated or touched  in  something that merely  has life,
and how and where(2) the Being of animals, for instance, is constituted by
some kind of ‘time’.
 

1. ‘…die augenblicklich ist auf...’
2. ‘…wie und wo...’ The earlier editions have ‘...wie und ob...’ (‘...how and whether...’).

(c) The Temporality of Falling

viii. Cf. Section 38, H. 175 ff.

In  our  temporal  Interpretation  of  understanding  and  state-of-mind,  we
not  only  have  come  up  against  a  primary  ecstasis  for  each  of  these
phenomena,  but  at  the  same  time  we  have  always  come  up  against
temporality as a whole. Just as understanding is made possible primarily by
the  future,  and  moods  are  made  possible  by  having  been,  the  third
constitutive  item  in  the  structure  of  care—namely,  falling—has  its
existential  meaning  in  the  Present.  Our  preparatory  analysis  of  falling
began with an Interpretation of idle talk, curiosity, and ambiguity.(ix) In the
temporal  analysis  of  falling  we  shall  take  the  same  course.  But  we  shall
restrict our investigation to a consideration of curiosity, for here the specific
temporality  of  falling  is  most  easily  seen.  Our  analysis  of  idle  talk  and
ambiguity, however, presupposes our having already clarified the temporal
Constitution of discourse and of explanation (interpretation).

Curiosity is a distinctive tendency of Dasein’s Being, in accordance with
which  Dasein  concerns  itself  with  a  potentiality-for-seeing.(x)  Like  the
concept  of  sight,  ‘seeing’  will  not  be  restricted  to  awareness  through  ‘the
eyes  of  the  body’.  Awareness  in  the  broader  sense  lets  what  is  ready-to-
hand  and  what  is  present-at-hand  be  encountered  ‘bodily’  in  themselves
with  regard  to  the  way  they  look.  Letting  them  be  thus  encountered  is
grounded  in  a  Present.  This  Present  gives  us  in  general  the  ecstatical
horizon within which entities can have bodily presence. Curiosity, however,
does not make present the present-at-hand in order to tarry alongside it and
understand it; it seeks to see only in order to see and to have seen. As this
making-present  which  gets  entangled  in  itself,  curiosity  has  an  ecstatical
unity  with  a  corresponding  future  and  a  corresponding  having  been.  The
craving for the new(1) is of course a way of proceeding towards something
not yet seen, but in such a manner that the making-present seeks to extricate
itself  from  awaiting.  Curiosity  is  futural  in  a  way  which  is  altogether
inauthentic,  and  in  such  a  manner,  moreover,  that  it  does  not  await  a
possibility, but,  in  its  craving,  just  desires  such  a  possibility  as  something
that  is  actual.  Curiosity  gets  constituted  by  a  making-present  which  is  not
held on to, but which, in merely making present, thereby seeks constantly to
run  away  from  the  awaiting  in  which  it  is  nevertheless  ‘held’,  though  not
held on to.(2)
 

ix. Cf. Sections 35 ff., H. 167 ff.
x. Cf. Section 36, H. 170 ff.

1. ‘Die Gier nach dem Neuen...’ Here Heidegger calls attention to the etymological structure of

the word ‘Neugier’ (‘curiosity’).

2.  ‘Die  Neugier  wird  konstituiert  durch  ein  ungehaltenes  Gegenwärtigen,  das,  nur
gegenwärtigend,  damit  ständig  dem  Gewärtigen,  darin  es  doch  ungehalten  “gehalten”  ist,  zu
entlaufen  sucht.’  This  sentence  involves  a  play  on  the  words  ‘Gewärtigen’  and  ‘Gegenwärtigen’,
‘gehalten’ and ‘ungehalten’, which is not easily reproduced. While ‘ungehalten’ can mean ‘not held
on to’ (as we have often translated it), it can also mean that one can no longer ‘contain’ oneself, and
becomes  ‘indignant’  or  ‘angry’.  In  the  present  passage,  Heidegger  may  well  have  more  than  one
meaning  in  mind.  The  point  would  be  that  in  curiosity  we  are  kept  (or  ‘held’)  awaiting  something
which we ‘make present’ to ourselves so vividly that we try to go beyond the mere awaiting of it and
become irritated or indignant because we are unable to do so. So while we are ‘held’ in our awaiting,
we do not ‘hold on to it’.

 

 

H. 347

The Present ‘arises or leaps away’ from the awaiting which belongs to
it,  and  it  does  so  in  the  sense  of  running  away  from  it,  as  we  have  just
emphasized.(1)  But  the  making-present  which  ‘leaps  away’  in  curiosity  is
so little devoted to the ‘thing’ it is curious about, that when it obtains sight
of  anything  it  already  looks  away  to  what  is  coming  next.  The  making-
present  which  ‘arises  or  leaps  away’  from  the  awaiting  of  a  definite
possibility which one has taken hold  of, makes possible  ontologically that
not-tarrying which is distinctive of curiosity. The making-present does not
‘leap away’ from the awaiting in such a manner, as it were, that it detaches
itself  from  that  awaiting  and  abandons  it  to  itself  (if  we  understand  this
ontically).  This  ‘leaping-away’  is  rather  an  ecstatical  modification  of
awaiting,  and  of  such  a  kind  that  the  awaiting  leaps  after  the  making-
present.(2) The awaiting gives itself up, as it were; nor does it any longer let
any  inauthentic  possibilities  of  concern  come  towards  it  from  that  with
which  it  concerns  itself,  unless  these  are  possibilities  only  for  a  making-
present which is not held on to. When the awaiting is ecstatically modified
by  the  making-present  which  leaps  away,  so  that  it  becomes  an  awaiting
which leaps after, this modification is the existential-temporal condition for
the possibility of distraction.
 

1.  ‘Die  Gegenwart  “entspringt”  dem  zugehörigen  Gewärtigen  in  dem  betonten  Sinne  des
Entlaufens.’ While the verb ‘entspringen’ can mean ‘arise from’ or ‘spring from’, as it usually does
in this work, it can also mean ‘run away from’ or ‘escape from’, as Heidegger says it does here. We
shall accordingly translate it in this context by the more literal ‘leap away’ or occasionally by ‘arise
or leap away’. The point of this passage will perhaps be somewhat plainer if one keeps in mind that
when  Heidegger  speaks  of  the  ‘Present’  (‘Gegenwart’)  or  ‘making-present’  (‘Gegenwärtigen’)  as
‘leaping away’, he is using these nouns in the more literal sense of ‘waiting towards’. Thus in one’s
‘present’ curiosity, one ‘leaps away’ from what one has been ‘awaiting’, and does so by ‘waiting for’
something different.

2.  ‘…dass  dieses  dem  Gegenwärtigen  nachspringt.’  The  idea  seems  to  be  that  when  curiosity
‘makes present’ new possibilities, the current awaiting is re-directed towards these instead of towards
the possibilities which have been awaited hitherto.

Through the awaiting which leaps after, on the other hand, the making-
present is abandoned more and more to itself. It makes present for the sake
of  the  Present.  It  thus  entangles  itself  in  itself,  so  that  the  distracted  not-
tarrying becomes never-dwelling-anywhere. This latter mode of the Present
is  the  counter-phenomenon  at  the  opposite  extreme  from  the  moment  of
vision.  In  never  dwelling  anywhere,  Being-there  is  everywhere  and

nowhere.  The  moment  of  vision,  however,  brings  existence  into  the
Situation and discloses the authentic ‘there’.

The  more  inauthentically  the  Present  is—that  is,  the  more  making-
present  comes  towards  ‘itself’—the  more  it  flees  in  the  face  of  a  definite
potentiality-for-Being and closes it off; but in that case, all the less can the
future  come  back  to  the  entity  which  has  been  thrown.  In  the  ‘leaping-
away’  of  the  Present,  one  also  forgets  increasingly.  The  fact  that  curiosity
always  holds  by  what  is  coming  next,  and  has  forgotten  what  has  gone
before,(1)  is  not  a  result  that  ensues  only  from  curiosity,  but  is  the
ontological condition for curiosity itself.

H. 348

 

As  regards  their  temporal  meaning,  the  characteristics  of  falling  which
tranquillization,  alienation,  self-
we  have  pointed  out—temptation, 
entanglement—mean  that  the  making-present  which  ‘leaps  away’  has  an
ecstatical  tendency  such  that  it  seeks  to  temporalize  itself  out  of  itself.
When  Dasein  entangles  itself,  this  has  an  ecstatical  meaning.  Of  course
when one speaks of the rapture with which one’s existence is carried away
in making present, this does not signify that Dasein detaches itself from its
Self and its “I”. Even when it makes present in the most extreme manner, it
remains  temporal—that  is,  awaiting  and  forgetful.  In  making  present,
moreover, Dasein still understands itself, though it has been alienated from
its  ownmost  potentiality-for-Being,  which  is  based  primarily  on  the
authentic future and on authentically having been. But in so far as making-
present  is  always  offering  something  ‘new’,  it  does  not  let  Dasein  come
back  to  itself  and  is  constantly  tranquillizing  it  anew.  This  tranquillizing,
however, strengthens in turn the tendency towards leaping away. Curiosity
is  ‘activated’ not  by the  endless immensity of what we  have not  yet  seen,
but rather by the falling kind of temporalizing which belongs to the Present
as it leaps away.(2) Even if one has seen everything, this is precisely when
curiosity fabricates something new.

As  a  mode  of  temporalizing,  the  ‘leaping-away’  of  the  Present  is
grounded in the essence of temporality, which is finite. Having been thrown
into  Being-towards-death,  Dasein  flees—proximally  and  for  the  most  part
—in  the  face  of  this  thrownness,  which  has  been  more  or  less  explicitly
revealed.  The  Present  leaps  away  from  its  authentic  future  and  from  its

authentic having been, so that it lets Dasein come to its authentic existence
only  by  taking  a  detour  through  that  Present.  The  ‘leaping-away’  of  the
Present—that is, the falling into lostness—has its source in that primordial
authentic  temporality  itself  which  makes  possible  thrown  Being-towards-
death.(3)
 

1. ‘…beim Nächsten hält und das Vordem vergessen hat...’
2.  ‘Nicht  die  endlose  Unübersehbarkeit  dessen,  was  noch  nicht  gesehen  ist,  “bewirkt”  die
Neugier,  sondern  die  verfallende  Zeitigungsart  der  entspringenden  Gegenwart.’  This  sentence  is
grammatically ambiguous.

3.  ‘Der  Ursprung  des  “Entspringens”  der  Gegenwart,  das  heisst  des  Verfallens  in  die
Verlorenheilt, ist die ursprüngliche, eigentliche Zeitlichkeit selbst, die das geworfene Sein zum Tode
ermöglicht.’  Our  conventions for translating ‘Ursprung’  as ‘source’,  ‘ursprünglich’  as ‘primordial’,
and  ‘entspringen’  as  ‘leap  away’,  conceal  Heidegger’s  exploitation  of  the  root  ‘spring-’  in  this
passage.

While  Dasein  can  indeed  be  brought  authentically  face to  face  with  its
thrownness,  so  as  to  understand  itself  in  that  thrownness  authentically,
nevertheless, this thrownness remains closed off from Daseis, as regards the
ontical “whence” and “how” of it. But the fact that it is thus closed off is by
no means just a kind of ignorance factually subsisting; it is constitutive for
Dasein’s facticity. It is also determinative for the ecstatical character of the
way existence has been abandoned to its own null basis.

H. 349

 

Proximally, the “throw” of Dasein’s Being-thrown into the world is one
that  does  not  authentically  get  “caught”.  The  ‘movement’  which  such  a
“throw”  implies  does  not  come  to  ‘a  stop’  because  Dasein  now  ‘is  there’.
Dasein gets dragged along in thrownness; that is to say, as something which
has been thrown into the  world, it loses itself in  the  ‘world’  in  its factical
submission  to  that  with  which  it  is  to  concern  itself.  The  Present,  which
makes up the existential meaning of “getting taken along”, never arrives at
any other ecstatical horizon of its own accord, unless it gets brought back
from  its  lostness  by  a  resolution,  so  that  both  the  current  Situation  and
therewith  the  primordial  ‘limit-Situation’  of  Being-towards-death,  will  be
disclosed as a moment of vision which has been held on to.

(d) The Temporality of Discourse

 

 

xi. Cf. Section 34, H. 160 ff.
 

When  the  “there”  has  been  completely  disclosed,  its  disclosedness  is
this
constituted  by  understanding,  state-of-mind,  and  falling;  and 
disclosedness  becomes  Articulated  by  discourse.  Thus  discourse  does  not
temporalize  itself  primarily  in  any  definite  ecstasis.  Factically,  however,
discourse  expresses  itself  for  the  most  part  in  language,  and  speaks
proximally  in  the  way  of addressing itself to  the  ‘environment’  by talking
about things concernfully; because of this, making-present has, of course, a
privileged constitutive function.

Tenses,  like  the  other  temporal  phenomena  of  language—‘aspects’  and
‘temporal stages’ [“Zeitstufen”]—do not spring from the fact that discourse
expresses itself ‘also’ about ‘temporal’ processes, processes encountered ‘in
time’. Nor does their basis lie in the fact that speaking runs its course ‘in a
psychical  time’.  Discourse  in  itself  is  temporal,  since  all  talking  about…,
of..., or to..., is grounded in the ecstatical unity of temporality. Aspects have
their  roots  in  the  primordial  temporality  of  concern,  whether  or  not  this
concern  relates  itself  to  that  which  is  within  time.  The  problem  of  their
existential-temporal  structure  cannot  even  be  formulated  with  the  help  of
the  ordinary  traditional  conception  of  time,  to  which  the  science  of
language needs must have recourse.(xii) But because in any discourse one
is  talking  about  entities,  even  if  not  primarily  and  predominantly  in  the
sense  of  theoretical  assertion,  the  analysis  of  the  temporal  Constitution  of
discourse  and  the  explication  of  the  temporal  characteristics  of  language-
patterns  can  be  tackled  only  if  the  problem  of  how  Being  and  truth  are
connected  in  principle,  is  broached  in  the  light  of  the  problematic  of
temporality.  We  can  then  define  even  the  ontological  meaning  of  the  ‘is’,
which a superficial theory of propositions and judgments has deformed to a
mere  ‘copula’.  Only  in  terms  of  the  temporality  of  discourse—that  is,  of
Dasein in general—can we clarify how ‘signification’ ‘arises’ and make the
possibility of concept-formation ontologically intelligible.(xiii)
 

xii.  Cf.,  among  others,  Jakob  Wackernagel,  Vorlesungen  über  Syntax,  vol.  I,  1920,  p.  15,  and
especially  pp.  149-210.  See  further  G.  Herbig,  ‘Aktionsart  und  Zeitstufe’  in  Indogermanische
Forschung, vol. VI, 1896, pp. 167 ff.

xiii.  Cf.  Division  Three,  Chapter  II  of  this  treatise.  [Since  Division  Three  has  never  been

published, this footnote has been deleted in the later editions.—Tr.]

H. 350

 

Understanding 

is  grounded  primarily 

the  future  (whether 
temporalize 

in 
in  awaiting).  States-of-mind 

in
themselves
anticipation  or 
primarily  in  having  been  (whether  in  repetition  or  in  having  forgotten).
Falling has its temporal roots primarily in the Present (whether in making-
present or in the moment of vision). All the same, understanding is in every
case a Present which ‘is in the process of having been’. All the same, one’s
state-of-mind temporalizes itself as a future which is ‘making present’. And
all the same, the Present ‘leaps away’ from a future that is in the process of
having been, or else it is held on to by such a future. Thus we can see that in
every  ecstasis,  temporality  temporalizes  itself  as  a  whole;  and  this  means
that  in  the  ecstatical  unity  with  which  temporality  has  fully  temporalized
itself currently, is grounded the totality of the structural whole of existence,
facticity, and falling—that is, the unity of the care-structure.

Temporalizing does not signify that ecstases come in a ‘succession’. The
future is not later than having been, and having been is not earlier than the
Present. Temporality temporalizes itself as a future which makes present in
the process of having been.

Both  the  disclosedness  of  the  “there”  and  Dasein’s  basic  existentiell
possibilities, authenticity and inauthenticity, are founded upon temporality.
But disclosedness always pertains with equal primordiality to the entirety of
Being-in-the-world—to  Being-in  as  well  as  to  the  world.  So  if  we  orient
ourselves  by  the  temporal  Constitution  of  disclosedness,  the  ontological
condition for the possibility that there can be entities which exist as Being-
in-the-world, must be something that may also be exhibited.

69.  The  Temporality  of  Being-in-the-world  and  the  Problem  of  the

Transcendence of the World
 

The ecstatical unity of temporality—that is, the unity of the ‘outside-of-
itself’ in the raptures of the future, of what has been, and of the Present—is
the condition for the possibility that there can be an entity which exists as

‘cleared’.(xiv)  The 

light  which  constitutes 

its  “there”.  The  entity  which  bears  the  title  “Being-there”  is  one  that  has
been 
this  clearedness
[Gelichtetheit]  of  Dasein,  is  not  something  ontically  present-at-hand  as  a
power or source for a radiant brightness occurring in the entity on occasion.
That by which this entity is essentially cleared—in other words, that which
makes  it  both  ‘open’  for  itself  and  ‘bright’  for  itself—is  what  we  have
defined  as  “care”,  in  advance  of  any  ‘temporal’  Interpretation.  In  care  is
grounded the full disclosedness of the “there”. Only by this clearedness is
any  illuminating  or  illumining,  any  awareness,  ‘seeing’,  or  having  of
something, made possible. We understand the light of this clearedness only
if we are not seeking some power implanted in us and present-at-hand, but
are interrogating the whole constitution of Dasein’s-Being—namely, care—
and are interrogating it as to the unitary basis for its existential possibility.
Ecstatical temporality clears the “there” primordially. It is what primarily
regulates the possible unity of all Dasein’s existential structures.
 

xiv. Cf. Section 28, H. 133.

H. 351

 

Only  through  the  fact  that  Being-there  is  rooted  in  temporality  can  we
get an insight into the existential possibility of that phenomenon  which, at
the  beginning  of  our  analytic  of  Dasein,  we  have  designated  as  its  basic
state: Being-in-the-world. We had to assure ourselves in the beginning that
the structural unity of this phenomenon cannot be torn apart. The question
of  the  basis  which  makes  the  unity  of  this  articulated  structure  possible,
remained  in  the  background.  With  the  aim  of  protecting  this  phenomenon
from  those  tendencies  to  split  it  up  which  were  the  most  obvious  and
therefore the most baleful, we gave a rather thorough Interpretation of that
everyday  mode  of  Being-in-the-world  which  is  closest  to  us—concernful
Being  alongside  the  ready-to-hand  within-the-world.  Now  that  care  itself
has  been  defined  ontologically  and  traced  back  to  temporality  as  its
existential  ground, concern can in  turn  be conceived explicitly  in  terms  of
either care or temporality.

In the first instance our analysis of the temporality of concern sticks to
the  mode  of  having  to  do  with  the  ready-to-hand  circumspectively.  Our
that
analysis 

existential-temporal 

possibility 

pursues 

then 

the 

circumspective  concern  may  be  modified  into  a  discovering  of  entities
within-the-world  in  the  sense  of certain possibilities of scientific research,
and discovering them ‘merely’ by looking at them. Our Interpretation of the
temporality  of  Being  alongside  what  is  ready-to-hand  and  present-at-hand
within-the-world—Being  alongside  circumspectively  as  well  as  with
theoretical  concern—shows  us  at  the  same  time  how  this  temporality  is
already the  advance  condition  for  that possibility of Being-in-the-world  in
which Being alongside entities within-the-world is grounded. If we take the
temporal Constitution of Being-in-the-world as a theme for analysis, we are
led to the following questions: in what way is anything like a world possible
at all? in what sense is the world? what does the world transcend, and how
does  it  do  so?  how  are  ‘independent’  [“unabhängige”]  entities  within-the-
world  ‘connected’  [“hängt”...  “zusammen”]  with  the  transcending  world?
To  expound  these  questions  ontologically  is  not  to  answer  them.  On  the
contrary, what such an exposition accomplishes is the clarification of those
structures with regard to which the problem of transcendence must be raised
—a clarification which is necessary beforehand. In the existential-temporal
Interpretation of Being-in-the-world, three things will be considered: (a) the
temporality  of  circumspective  concern;  (b)  the  temporal  meaning  of  the
way  in  which  circumspective  concern  becomes  modified  into  theoretical
knowledge  of  what  is  present-at-hand  within-the-world;  (c)  the  temporal
problem of the transcendence of the world.

(a) The Temporality of Circumspective Concern

 

 

H. 352

How  are  we  to  obtain  the  right  point  of  view  for  analysing  the
temporality  of  concern?  We  have  called  concernful  Being  alongside  the
‘world’  our  “dealings  in  and  with  the  environment”.(xv)  As  phenomena
which  are  examples  of  Being  alongside,  we  have  chosen  the  using,
manipulation,  and  producing  of  the  ready-to-hand,  and  the  deficient  and
undifferentiated  modes  of  these;  that  is,  we  have  chosen  ways  of  Being
alongside  what  belongs  to  one’s  everyday  needs.(xvi)  In  this  kind  of
concern  Dasein’s  authentic  existence  too  maintains  itself,  even  when  for
such existence this concern is ‘a matter of indifference’. The ready-to-hand

things with which we concern ourselves are not the causes of our concern,
as if this were to arise only by the effects of entities within-the-world. Being
alongside  the  ready-to-hand  cannot  be  explained  ontically  in  terms  of  the
ready-to-hand itself, nor can the ready-to-hand be derived contrariwise from
this  kind  of  Being.  But  neither  are  concern,  as  a  kind  of  Being  which
belongs to Dasein, and that with which we concern ourselves, as something
ready-to-hand  within-the-world,  just  present-at-hand  together.  All  the
same,  a  ‘connection’  subsists  between  them.  That  which  is  dealt  with,  if
rightly  understood,  sheds  light  upon  concernful  dealings  themselves.  And
furthermore, if we miss the phenomenal structure of what is dealt with, then
we  fail  to  recognize  the  existential  constitution  of  dealing.  Of  course  we
have already made an essential gain for the analysis of those entities which
we encounter as closest to us, if their specific character as equipment does
not  get  passed  over.  But  we  must  understand  further  that  concernful
dealings never dwell with any individual item of equipment. Our using and
manipulating  of  any  definite  item  of  equipment  still  remains  oriented
towards  some  equipmental  context.  If,  for  instance,  we  are  searching  for
some equipment which we have ‘misplaced’, then what we have in mind is
not  merely  what  we  are  searching  for,  or  even  primarily  this;  nor  do  we
have it in mind in an isolated ‘act’; but the range of the equipmental totality
has  already  been  discovered  beforehand.  Whenever  we  ‘go  to  work’  and
seize hold of something, we do not push out from the “nothing” and come
upon some item of equipment which has been presented to us in isolation;
in laying hold of an item of equipment, we come back to it from whatever
work-world has already been disclosed.
 

xv. Cf. Section 15, H. 66 ff.
xvi. Cf. Section 12, H. 56 ff.

H. 353

 

The  upshot  of  this  is  that  if  in  our  analysis  of  dealings  we  aim  at  that
which  is  dealt  with,  then  one’s  existent  Being  alongside  the  entities  with
which one concerns oneself must be given an orientation not towards some
isolated  item  of  equipment  which  is  ready-to-hand,  but  towards  the
equipmental totality. This way of taking what is dealt with, is forced upon
us also if we consider that character of Being which belongs distinctively to

is 

that 

involvement.(xvii)  We
ready-to-hand—namely, 
equipment 
understand the term “involvement” ontologically. The kind of talk in which
we  say  that  something  has  with  it  an  involvement  in  something,  is  not
meant to establish a fact ontically, but rather to indicate the kind of Being
that  belongs  to  what  is  ready-to-hand.  The  relational  character  of
involvement—of  its  ‘with...  in...’—suggests  that  “an”  equipment  is
ontologically  impossible.  Of  course  just  a  solitary  item  of  equipment  may
be ready-to-hand while another is missing. But this makes known to us that
the  very  thing  that  is  ready-to-hand  belongs  to  something  else.  Our
concernful  dealings  can 
is  ready-to-hand  be  encountered
circumspectively only if in these dealings we already understand something
like  the  involvement  which  something  has  in  something.  The  Being-
alongside which discovers circumspectively in concern, amounts to letting
something  be 
involvement
is, 
understandingly.  Letting  things  be  involved  makes  up  the  existential
structure  of  concern.  But  concern,  as  Being  alongside  something,  belongs
to  the  essential  constitution  of  care;  and  care,  in  turn,  is  grounded  in
temporality. If all this is so, then the existential condition of the possibility
of letting things be involved must be sought in a mode of the temporalizing
of temporality.

to  projecting  an 

involved—that 

let  what 

Letting something be involved is implied in the simplest handling of an
item  of  equipment.  That  which  we  let  it  be  involved    i  n    [Das  Wobei
desselben] has the character of a “towards-which”; with regard to this, the
equipment  is  either  usable  or  in  use.  The  understanding  of  the  “towards-
which”—that is, the understanding of what the equipment is involved in—
has  the  temporal  structure  of  awaiting.  In  awaiting  the  “towards-which”,
concern  can  at  the  same  time  come  back  by  itself  to  the  sort  of  thing  in
which it is involved. The awaiting of what it is involved in, and—together
with  this  awaiting—the  retaining  of  that  which  is  thus  involved,  make
possible  in  its  ecstatical  unity  the  specifically  manipulative  way  in  which
equipment is made present.(1)
 

1. ‘Das Gewärtigen des Wobei in eins mit dem Behalten des Womit der Bewandtnis ermöglicht

in seiner ekstatischen Einheit das spezifisch hantierende Gegenwärtigen des Zeugs.’

xvii. Cf. Section 18, H. 83 ff.

 

H. 354

 

The  awaiting  of  the  “towards-which”  is  neither  a  considering  of  the
‘goal’  nor  an  expectation  of  the  impendent  finishing  of  the  work  to  be
produced.  It  has  by  no  means  the  character  of  getting  something
thematically into one’s grasp. Neither does the retaining of that which has
an  involvement  signify  holding  it  fast  thematically.  Manipulative  dealings
no  more  relate  themselves  merely  to  that  in  which  we  let  something  be
involved,  than  they  do  to  what  is  involved  itself.  Letting  something  be
involved is constituted rather in the unity of a retention which awaits, and it
is  constituted  in  such  a  manner,  indeed,  that  the  making-present  which
arises from this, makes possible the characteristic absorption of concern in
its  equipmental  world.  When  one  is  wholly  devoted  to  something  and
‘really’  busies  oneself  with  it,  one  does  not  do  so  just  alongside  the  work
itself, or alongside the tool, or alongside both of them ‘together’. The unity
of  the  relations  in  which  concern  circumspectively  ‘operates’,  has  been
established  already  by  letting-things-be-involved—which  is  based  upon
temporality.

A  specific  kind  of  forgetting  is  essential  for  the  temporality  that  is
constitutive for letting something be involved. The Self must forget itself if,
lost in the world of equipment, it is to be able ‘actually’ to go to work and
manipulate  something.  But  all  the  same,  inasmuch  as  an  awaiting  always
leads  the  way  in  the  unity  of  the  temporalizing  of  concern,  concernful
Dasein’s  own  potentiality-for-Being  has,  as  we  shall  show,  been  given  a
position in care.(1)
 

1. ‘…in die Sorge gestellt.’

The  making-present  which  awaits  and  retains,  is  constitutive  for  that
familiarity  in  accordance  with  which  Dasein,  as  Being-with-one-another,
‘knows its way about’ [sich “auskennt”] in its public environment. Letting
things  be  involved  is  something  which  we  understand  existentially  as  a
letting-them-‘be’  [ein  “Sein”-lassen].  On  such  a  basis  circumspection  can
encounter the ready-to-hand as that entity which it is. Hence we can further
elucidate  the  temporality  of  concern  by  giving  heed  to  those  modes  of
circumspectively 
letting  something  be  encountered  which  we  have
characterized  above(xviii)  as  “conspicuousness”,  “obtrusiveness”,  and
“obstinacy”.  Thematical  perception  of  Things  is  precisely  not  the  way

equipment  ready-to-hand  is  encountered  in  its  ‘true  “in-itself”  ’;  it  is
encountered  rather  in  the  inconspicuousness  of  what  we  can  come  across
‘obviously’ and ‘Objectively’. But if there is something conspicuous in the
totality of such entities, this implies that the equipmental totality as such is
obtruding itself along with it. What sort of existential structure must belong
to  letting  things  be  involved,  if  such  a  procedure  can  let  something  be
encountered  as  conspicuous?  This  question  is  now  aimed  not  at  those
factical occasions which turn our attention to something already presented,
but rather at the ontological meaning of the fact that it can thus be turned.
 

xviii. Cf. Section 16, H. 72 ff.

H. 355

 

When  something  cannot  be  used—when,  for  instance,  a  tool  definitely
refuses  to  work—it  can  be  conspicuous  only  in  and  for  dealings  in  which
something  is  manipulated.  Even  by  the  sharpest  and  most  persevering(1)
‘perception’  and  ‘representation’  of  Things,  one  can  never  discover
anything  like  the  damaging  of  a  tool.  If  we  are  to  encounter  anything
unmanageable, the handling must be of such a sort that it can be disturbed.
But what does this signify ontologically? The making-present which awaits
and  retains,  gets  held  up  with  regard  to  its  absorption  in  relationships  of
involvement,  and  it  gets  held  up  by  what  will  exhibit  itself  afterwards  as
damage. The making-present, which awaits the “towards-which” with equal
primordiality, is held fast alongside the equipment which has been used, and
it  is  held  fast  in  such  a  manner,  indeed,  that  the  “towards-which”  and  the
“in-order-to” are now encountered explicitly for the first time. On the other
hand,  the  only  way  in  which  the  making-present  itself  can  meet  up  with
anything  unsuitable,  is  by  already  operating  in  such  a  way  as  to  retain
awaitingly  that  which  has  an  involvement  in  something.  To  say  that
making-present  gets  ‘held  up’  is  to  say  that  in  its  unity  with  the  awaiting
which  retains,  it  diverts  itself  into  itself  more  and  more,  and  is  thus
constitutive for the ‘inspecting’ [“Nachsehen”], testing, and eliminating of
the  disturbance.  If  concernful  dealings  were  merely  a  sequence  of
‘Experiences’  running  their  course  ‘in  time’,  however  intimately  these
might  be  ‘associated’,  it  would  still  be  ontologically  impossible  to  let  any
conspicuous  unusable  equipment  be  encountered.  Letting  something  be

involved must, as such, be grounded in the ecstatical unity of the making-
present  which  awaits  and  retains,  whatever  we  have  made  accessible  in
dealing with contexts of equipment.(2)
 

1.  ‘anhaltendste’.  This  is  the  first  of  several  compounds  of  the  verb  ‘halten’  (‘to  hold’)  which
appear in this and the following paragraphs. Others are ‘behalten’ (‘retain’ in the sense of holding in
one’s  memory),  ‘aufhalten’  (‘hold  up’  in  the  sense  of  delaying  or  bringing  to  a  halt),  ‘festhalten’
(‘hold fast’).

2.  ‘Das  Bewendenlassen  muss  als  solches,  was  immer  es  auch  an  Zeugzusammenhängen
in  der  ekstatischen  Einheit  des  gewärtigen-behaltenden

umgänglich  zugänglich  macht, 
Gegenwärtigens gründen.’

And how is it possible to ‘ascertain’ what is missing [Fehlendem]—that
is  to  say,  un-ready-to-hand,  not  just  ready-to-hand  in  an  unmanageable
way? That which is un-ready-to-hand is discovered circumspectively when
we miss it [im Vermissen]. The ‘affirmation’ that something is not present-
at-hand,  is  founded  upon  our  missing  it;  and  both  our  missing  it  and  our
affirmation have their  own existential  presuppositions.  Such  missing is  by
no  means  a  not-making-present  [Nichtgegenwärtigen];  it  is  rather  a
deficient  mode  of  the  Present  in  the  sense  of  the  making-unpresent
[Ungegenwärtigens] of something which one has expected or which one has
always had at one’s disposal. If, when one circumspectively lets something
be  involved,  one  were  not  ‘from  the  outset’  awaiting  the  object  of  one’s
concern,  and  if  such  awaiting  did  not  temporalize  itself  in  a  unity  with  a
making-present,  then  Dasein  could  never  ‘find’  that  something  is  missing
[fehlt].

On the other hand, when one is making present something ready-to-hand
by awaiting, the possibility of one’s getting surprised by something is based
upon one’s not awaiting something else which stands in a possible context
of  involvement  with  what  one  awaits.  In  the  not  awaiting  of  the  making-
present which is lost, the ‘horizonal’ leeway within which one’s Dasein can
be assailed by something surprising is first disclosed.

H. 356

 

That  with  which  one’s  concernful  dealings  fail  to  cope,  either  by
producing or procuring something, or even by turning away, holding aloof,
or protecting oneself from something, reveals itself in its insurmountability.
Concern resigns itself to it.(1) But resigning oneself to something is a mode

peculiar to circumspectively letting it be encountered. On the basis of this
kind  of  discovery  concern  can  come  across  that  which  is  inconvenient,
disturbing, hindering, endangering, or in general resistant in some way. The
temporal structure of resigning oneself to something, lies in a non-retaining
which  awaitingly  makes  present.  In  awaitingly  making  present,  one  does
not,  for  instance,  reckon  ‘on’  that  which  is  unsuitable  but  none  the  less
available. “Not reckoning with” something, is a mode of “taking into one’s
reckoning”  that  which  one  cannot  cling  to.  That  which  one  has  “not
reckoned  with”  does  not  get  forgotten;  it  gets  retained,  so  that  in  its  very
unsuitability  it  remains  ready-to-hand.(2)  That  which  is  ready-to-hand  in
this  manner  belongs  to  the  everyday  stock  or  content  of  the  factically
disclosed environment.
 

1. ‘Das Besorgen findet sich damit ab.’
2.  ‘Die  zeitliche  Struktur  des  Sichabfindens  liegt  in  einem  gewärtigend-gegenwärtigenden
Unbehalten.  Das  gewärtigende  Gegenwärtigen  rechnet  zum  Beispiel  nicht  “auf”  das  Ungeeignete,
aber  gleichwohl  Verfügbare.  Das  Nichtrechnen  mit...  ist  ein  Modus  des  Rechnungtragens  dem
gegenüber, woran man sich nicht halten kann. Es wird nicht vergessen, sondern behalten, so dass es
gerade in seiner Ungeeignetheit zuhanden bleibt.’

Only in so far as something resistant has been discovered on the basis of
the  ecstatical  temporality  of  concern,  can  factical  Dasein  understand  itself
in its abandonment to a ‘world’ of which it never becomes master. Even if
concern  remains  restricted  to  the  urgency  of  everyday  needs,  it  is  never  a
pure making-present, but arises from a retention which awaits; on the basis
of such a retention, or as such a ‘basis’, Dasein exists in a world. Thus in a
certain manner, factically existent Dasein always knows its way about, even
in a ‘world’ which is alien.

When, in one’s concern, one lets something be involved, one’s doing so
is founded on temporality, and amounts to an altogether pre-ontological and
non-thematic way  of understanding  involvement  and readiness-to-hand. In
what  follows,  it  will  be  shown  to  what  extent  the  understanding  of  these
types of Being as such is, in the end, also founded on temporality. We must
first give a more concrete demonstration of the temporality of Being-in-the-
world.  With  this  as  our  aim,  we  shall  trace  how  the  theoretical  attitude
towards the ‘world’ ‘arises’ out of circumspective concern with the ready-
to-hand.  Not  only  the  circumspective  discovering  of  entities  within-the-
world but also the theoretical discovering of them is founded upon Being-
in-the-world.  The  existential-temporal  Interpretation  of  these  ways  of

discovering  is  preparatory  to  the  temporal  characterization  of  this  basic
state of Dasein.

(b)  The  Temporal  Meaning  of  the  Way  in  which  Circumspective
Concern becomes Modified into the Theoretical Discovery of the Present-
at-hand Within-the-world
 

H. 357

 

When  in  the  course  of  existential  ontological  analysis  we  ask  how
theoretical  discovery  ‘arises’  out  of  circumspective  concern,  this  implies
already  that  we  are  not  making  a  problem  of  the  ontical  history  and
development  of  science,  or  of  the  factical  occasions  for  it,  or  of  its
proximate  goals.  In  seeking  the  ontological  genesis  of  the  theoretical
attitude, we are asking which of those conditions implied in Dasein’s state
of Being are existentially necessary for the possibility of Dasein’s existing
in the way of scientific research. This formulation of the question is aimed
at an existential conception of science. This must be distinguished from the
‘logical’  conception  which  understands  science  with  regard  to  its  results
and  defines  it  as  ‘something  established  on  an  interconnection  of  true
propositions—that  is,  propositions  counted  as  valid’.  The  existential
conception understands science as a way of existence and thus as a mode of
Being-in-the-world,  which  discovers  or  discloses  either  entities  or  Being.
Yet  a  fully  adequate  existential  Interpretation  of  science  cannot  be  carried
out  until  the  meaning  of  Being  and  the  ‘connection’  between  Being  and
truth(xix) have  been  clarified  in  terms  of  the  temporality  of  existence.(1)
The  following  deliberations  are  preparatory  to  the  understanding  of  this
central  problematic,  within  which,  moreover,  the  idea  of  phenomenology,
as distinguished from the preliminary conception of it which we indicated
by way of introduction(xx) will be developed for the first time.
 

xix. Cf. Section 44, H. 212 ff.
xx. Cf. Section 7, H. 27 ff.

 

1. The italics in this and the following sentence appear only in the later editions.

Corresponding to the stage of our study at which we have now arrived, a
further restriction will be imposed upon our Interpretation of the theoretical
attitude. We shall investigate only the way in which circumspective concern
with the ready-to-hand changes over into an exploration of what we come
across as present-at-hand  within-the-world; and we  shall  be guided  by the
aim  of  penetrating  to  the  temporal  Constitution  of  Being-in-the-world  in
general.

H. 358

 

In characterizing the  change-over from the  manipulating and using  and
so  forth  which  are  circumspective  in  a  ‘practical’  way,  to  ‘theoretical’
exploration,  it  would  be  easy  to  suggest  that  merely  looking  at  entities  is
something  which  emerges  when  concern  holds  back  from  any  kind  of
manipulation. What is decisive in the ‘emergence’ of the theoretical attitude
would  then  lie  in  the  disappearance of praxis.  So  if  one  posits  ‘practical’
concern  as  the  primary  and  predominant  kind  of  Being  which  factical
Dasein possesses, the ontological possibility of ‘theory’ will be due to the
absence  of  praxis—that  is,  to  a  privation.  But  the  discontinuance  of  a
specific manipulation in our concernful dealings does not simply leave the
guiding  circumspection  behind  as  a  remainder.  Rather,  our  concern  then
diverts itself specifically into a just-looking-around [ein Nur-sich-umsehen].
But  this  is  by  no  means  the  way  in  which  the  ‘theoretical’  attitude  of
science is reached. On the contrary, the tarrying which is discontinued when
one  manipulates,  can  take  on  the  character  of  a  more  precise  kind  of
circumspection,  such  as  ‘inspecting’,  checking  up  on  what  has  been
attained,  or  looking  over  the  ‘operations’  [“Betrieb”]  which  are  now  ‘at  a
standstill’.  Holding  back  from  the  use  of  equipment  is  so  far  from  sheer
‘theory’  that  the  kind  of  circumspection  which  tarries  and  ‘considers’,
remains wholly in the grip of the ready-to-hand equipment with which one
is concerned. ‘Practical’ dealings have their own ways of tarrying. And just
as praxis has its own specific kind of sight (‘theory’), theoretical research is
not without a praxis of its own. Reading off the measurements which result
from an experiment often requires a complicated ‘technical’ set-up for the
experimental design. Observation with a microscope is dependent upon the
production  of  ‘preparations’.  Archaeological  excavation,  which  precedes
any Interpretation of the ‘findings’, demands manipulations of the grossest

kind.  But  even  in  the  ‘most  abstract’  way  of  working  out  problems  and
establishing  what  has  been  obtained,  one  manipulates  equipment  for
writing,  for  example.  However  ‘uninteresting’  and  ‘obvious’  such
components of scientific research may be, they are by no means a matter of
indifference ontologically. The explicit suggestion that scientific behaviour
as  a  way  of  Being-in-the-world,  is  not  just  a  ‘purely  intellectual  activity’,
may seem petty and superfluous. If only it were not plain from this triviality
that  it  is  by  no  means  patent  where  the  ontological  boundary  between
‘theoretical’ and ‘atheoretical’ behaviour really runs!

Someone will hold that all manipulation in the sciences is merely in the
service  of  pure  observation—the  investigative  discovery  and  disclosure  of
the  ‘things  themselves’.  ‘Seeing’,  taken  in  the  widest  sense,  regulates  all
‘procedures’  and  retains  its  priority.  ‘To  whatever  kind  of  objects  one’s
knowledge may relate itself, and by whatever means it may do so, still that
through which it relates itself to them immediately, and which all thinking
as a means has as its goal (author’s italics) is intuition.(xxi) The idea of the
intuitus has guided all Interpretation of knowledge from the beginnings of
Greek  ontology  until  today,  whether  or  not  that  intuitus  can  be  factically
reached. If we are to exhibit the existential genesis of science in accordance
with  the  priority  of  ‘seeing’,  we  must  set  out  by  characterizing  the
circumspection which is the guide for ‘practical’ concern.
 

xxi. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, second edition p. 33.

H. 359

 

Circumspection operates in the involvement-relationships of the context
of  equipment  which  is  ready-to-hand.  Moreover,  it  is  subordinate  to  the
guidance of a more or less explicit survey of the equipmental totality of the
current equipment-world and of the public environment which belongs to it.
This  survey  is  not  just  one  in  which  things  that  are  present-at-hand  are
subsequently scraped together. What is essential to it is that one should have
a  primary  understanding  of  the  totality  of  involvements  within  which
factical  concern  always  takes  its  start.  Such  a  survey  illumines  one’s
concern, and receives its ‘light’ from that potentiality-for-Being on the part
of  Dasein  for  the  sake  of  which  concern  exists  as  care.  In  one’s  current
using  and  manipulating,  the  concernful  circumspection  which  does  this

‘surveying’,  brings  the  ready-to-hand  closer  to  Dasein,  and  does  so  by
interpreting what has been sighted. This specific way of bringing the object
of concern close by interpreting it circumspectively, we call “deliberating”
[Überlegung]. The scheme peculiar to this is the ‘if—then’; if this or that,
for instance, is to be produced, put to use, or averted, then some ways and
means,  circumstances,  or  opportunities  will  be  needed.  Circumspective
deliberation illumines Dasein’s current factical situation in the environment
with  which it concerns itself. Accordingly,  such deliberation never  merely
‘affirms’  that  some  entity  is  present-at-hand  or  has  such  and  such
properties. Moreover, deliberation can be performed even when that which
is  brought  close  in  it  circumspectively  is  not  palpably  ready-to-hand  and
does not have presence within the closest range. Bringing the environment
closer  in  circumspective  deliberation  has  the  existential  meaning  of  a
making  present;  for  envisaging(1)  is  only  a  mode  of  this.  In  envisaging,
one’s deliberation catches sight directly of that which is needed but which is
un-ready-to-hand. Circumspection which envisages does not relate itself to
‘mere representations’.
 

1. ‘Here the familiar noun ‘Vergegenwärtigung’ (‘envisaging’) is printed with the first syllable in
italics  to draw  attention  to its connection with the special phenomenological verb ‘Gegenwärtigen’
(‘making present’).

H. 360

 

Circumspective  making-present,  however,  is  a  phenomenon  with  more
than one kind of foundation. In the first instance, it always belongs to a full
ecstatical unity of temporality. It is grounded in a retention of that context
of  equipment  with  which  Dasein  concerns  itself  in  awaiting  a  possibility.
That which has already been laid open in awaiting and retaining is brought
closer  by  one’s  deliberative  making-present  or  envisaging.(1)  But  if
deliberation is to be able to operate in the scheme of the ‘if—then’, concern
must  already  have  ‘surveyed’  a  context  of  involvements  and  have  an
understanding of it. That which is considered with an ‘if’ must already be
understood  as  something  or  other.  This  does  not  require  that  the
understanding  of  equipment  be  expressed  in  a  predication.  The  schema
‘something as something’ has already been sketched out beforehand in the
structure  of  one’s  pre-predicative  understanding.  The  as-structure  is
grounded  ontologically  in  the  temporality  of  understanding.  But  on  the

other  hand,  only  to  the  extent  that  Dasein,  in  awaiting  some  possibility
(here  this  means  a  “towards-which”),  has  come  back  to  a  “towards-this”
(that is to say that it retains something ready-to-hand)—only to this extent
can the  making-present which belongs to  this awaiting  and retaining, start
with  what  is  thus  retained,  and  bring  it,  in  its  character  of  having  been
assigned  or  referred  to  its  “towards-which”,  explicitly  closer.  The
deliberation which brings it close must, in the schema of making present, be
in conformity with the kind of Being that belongs to what is to be brought
close.  The  involvement-character  of  the  ready-to-hand  does  not  first  get
discovered  by  deliberation,  but  only  gets  brought  close  by  it  in  such  a
manner  as  to  let  that  in  which  something  has  an  involvement,  be  seen
circumspectively as this very thing.
 

1. 

‘Das 

im  gewärtigenden  Behalten  schon  Aufgeschlossene  bringt  die  überlegende

Gegenwärtigung bzw. Vergegenwärtigung näher.’

The  way  the  Present  is  rooted  in  the  future  and  in  having  been,  is  the
existential-temporal  condition  for  the  possibility  that  what  has  been
projected  in  circumspective  understanding  can  be  brought  closer  in  a
making-present, and in such a way that the Present can thus conform itself
to  what  is  encountered  within  the  horizon  of  awaiting  and  retaining;  this
means that it must interpret itself in the schema of the as-structure. We have
thus answered the question we formulated earlier—the question of whether
the  as-structure  has  some  existential-ontological  connection  with  the
phenomenon  of  projection.(xxii)  Like  understanding  and  interpretation  in
general, the ‘as’ is grounded in the ecstatico-horizonal unity of temporality.
In our fundamental analysis of Being, and of course in connection with the
Interpretation  of  the  ‘is’  (which,  as  a  copula,  gives  ‘expression’  to  the
addressing  of  something  as  something),  we  must  again  make  the
phenomenon  of  the  “as”  a  theme  and  delimit  the  conception  of  this
‘schema’ existentially.

The  question  of  the  genesis  of  theoretical  behaviour  is  one  which  we
have left hanging. What can a temporal characterization of circumspective
deliberation  and  its  schemata  contribute  to  the  answering  of  it?  Only  that
this elucidates the Situation in which circumspective concern changes over
into  theoretical  discovering—a  Situation  of  the  kind  which  belongs  to
Dasein. We may then try to analyse this change-over itself by taking as our

clue  an  elementary  assertion  which  is  circumspectively  deliberative  in
character and the modifications which are possible for it.
 

xxii. Cf. Section 32, H. 151.

H. 361

 

When we are using a tool circumspectively, we can say, for instance, that
the hammer is too heavy or too light. Even the proposition that the hammer
is  heavy can give  expression to  a concernful  deliberation, and signify  that
the hammer is not an easy one—in other words, that it takes force to handle
it,  or  that  it  will  be  hard  to  manipulate.(1)  But  this  proposition  can  also
mean that the entity before us, which we already know circumspectively as
a hammer, has a weight—that is to say, it has the ‘property’ of heaviness: it
exerts  a  pressure  on  what  lies  beneath  it,  and  it  falls  if  this  is  removed.
When  this  kind  of  talk  is  so  understood,  it  is  no  longer  spoken  within  the
horizon  of  awaiting  and  retaining  an  equipmental  totality  and  its
involvement-relationships.  What  is  said  has  been  drawn  from  looking  at
what is suitable for an entity with ‘mass’. We have now sighted something
that  is  suitable  for  the  hammer,  not  as  a  tool,  but  as  a  corporeal  Thing
subject to the law of gravity. To talk circumspectively of ‘too heavy’ or ‘too
light’ no longer has any ‘meaning’; that is to say, the entity in itself, as we
now  encounter  it,  gives  us  nothing  with  relation  to  which  it  could  be
‘found’ too heavy or too light.
 

1. ‘Auch der Satz: der Hammer ist schwer, kann einer besorgenden Überlegung Ausdruck geben
und  bedeuten:  er  ist  nicht  leicht,  das  heisst,  er  fordert  zur  Handhabung  Kraft,  bzw.  er  wird  die
Hantierung  erschweren.’  Here  Heidegger  is  exploiting  the  double  meaning  of  the  German  pair  of
adjectives, ‘schwer’ and ‘leicht’, which may correspond either to the English pair ‘heavy’ and ‘light’,
or to the pair ‘difficult’ and ‘easy’.

Why  is  it  that  what  we  are  talking  about—the  heavy  hammer—shows
itself differently when our way of talking is thus modified? Not because we
are  keeping  our  distance  from  manipulation,  nor  because  we  are  just
looking away  [absehen]  from  the  equipmental  character  of  this  entity,  but
rather because we  are  looking at  [ansehen]  the  ready-to-hand  thing which
we  encounter,  and  looking  at  it  ‘in  a  new  way’  as  something  present-at-
hand. The  understanding  of  Being  by  which  our  concernful  dealings  with

entities  within-the-world  have  been  guided  has  changed  over.  But  if,
instead of deliberating circumspectively about something ready-to-hand, we
‘take’  it  as  something  present-at-hand,  has  a  scientific  attitude  thus
constituted itself? Moreover, even that which is ready-to-hand can be made
a  theme  for  scientific  investigation  and  determination,  for  instance  when
one  studies  someone’s  environment—his  milieu—in  the  context  of  a
historiological biography. The context of equipment that is ready-to-hand in
an everyday manner, its historical emergence and utilization, and its factical
role  in  Dasein—all  these  are  objects  for  the  science  of  economics.  The
ready-to-hand can become the ‘Object’ of a science without having to lose
its  character  as  equipment.  A  modification  of  our  understanding  of  Being
does  not  seem  to  be  necessarily  constitutive  for  the  genesis  of  the
theoretical attitude ‘towards Things’. Certainly not, if this “modification” is
to imply a change in the kind of Being which, in understanding the entity
before us, we understand it to possess.

H. 362

 

In  our  first  description  of  the  genesis  of  the  theoretical  attitude  out  of
circumspection, we have made basic a way of theoretically grasping entities
within-the-world—physical  Nature—in  which  the  modification  of  our
understanding  of  Being  is  tantamount  to  a  change-over.  In  the  ‘physical’
assertion that ‘the hammer is heavy’ we overlook not only the tool-character
of the entity we encounter, but also something that belongs to any ready-to-
hand equipment: its place. Its place becomes a matter of indifference. This
does  not  mean  that  what  is  present-at-hand  loses  its  ‘location’  altogether.
But its place becomes a spatio-temporal position, a ‘world-point’, which is
in  no  way  distinguished  from  any  other.  This  implies  not  only  that  the
multiplicity of places of equipment ready-to-hand within the confines of the
environment becomes modified to a pure multiplicity of positions, but that
the  entities  of  the  environment  are  altogether  released  from  such
confinement  [entschränkt].  The  aggregate  of  the  present-at-hand  becomes
the theme.
In 

the  releasing  from  such  environmental
confinement  belongs  to  the  way  one’s  understanding  of  Being  has  been
modified; and it becomes at the same time a delimitation of the ‘realm’ of
the
the  present-at-hand, 

takes  as  one’s  guiding  clue 

the  case  before  us, 

if  one  now 

understanding  of  Being  in  the  sense  of  presence-at-hand.  The  more
appropriately  the  Being  of  the  entities  to  be  explored  is  understood  under
the  guidance  of  an  understanding  of  Being,  and  the  more  the  totality  of
entities  has  been  Articulated  in  its  basic  attributes  as  a  possible  area  of
subject-matter for a science, all the more secure will be the perspective for
one’s methodical inquiry.

The  classical  example  for  the  historical  development  of  a  science  and
even for its ontological genesis, is the rise of mathematical physics. What is
decisive  for  its  development  does  not  lie  in  its  rather  high  esteem  for  the
observation of ‘facts’, nor in its ‘application’ of mathematics in determining
the character of natural processes; it lies rather in the way in which Nature
herself is mathematically projected. In this projection something constantly
present-at-hand  (matter)  is  uncovered  beforehand,  and  the  horizon  is
opened so that one may be guided by looking at those constitutive items in
it which are quantitatively determinable (motion, force, location, and time).
Only ‘in the light’ of a Nature which has been projected in this fashion can
anything like a ‘fact’ be found and set up for an experiment regulated and
delimited  in  terms  of  this  projection.  The  ‘grounding’  of  ‘factual  science’
was possible only because the researchers understood that in principle there
are  no  ‘bare  facts’.  In  the  mathematical  projection  of  Nature,  moreover,
what is decisive is not primarily the mathematical as such; what is decisive
is  that  this  projection  discloses  something  that  is    a  p  r  i  o  r  i. Thus  the
paradigmatic  character  of  mathematical  natural  science  does  not  lie  in  its
exactitude or in the fact that it is binding for ‘Every-man’; it consists rather
in the fact that the entities which it takes as its theme are discovered in it in
the only way in which entities can be discovered—by the prior projection of
their state of Being. When the basic concepts of that understanding of Being
by which we are guided have been worked out, the clues of its methods, the
structure  of  its  way  of  conceiving  things,  the  possibility  of  truth  and
certainty  which  belongs  to  it,  the  ways  in  which  things  get  grounded  or
proved,  the  mode  in  which  it  is  binding  for  us,  and  the  way  it  is
communicated—all  these  will  be  Determined.  The  totality  of  these  items
constitutes the full existential conception of science.

H. 363

 

The  scientific  projection  of  any  entities  which  we  have  somehow
encountered already lets their kind of Being be understood explicitly and in
such a manner that it thus becomes manifest what ways are possible for the
pure  discovery  of  entities  within-the-world.  The  Articulation  of  the
understanding  of  Being,  the  delimitation  of  an  area  of  subject-matter  (a
delimitation  guided  by  this  understanding),  and  the  sketching-out  of  the
way of conceiving which is appropriate to such entities—all these belong to
the totality of this projecting; and this totality is what we call “thematizing”.
Its  aim  is  to  free  the  entities  we  encounter  within-the-world,  and  to  free
them  in  such  a  way  that  they  can  ‘throw  themselves  against’(1)  a  pure
discovering—that  is,  that  they  can  become  “Objects”.  Thematizing
Objectifies. It does not first ‘posit’ the entities, but frees them so that one
can  interrogate  them  and  determine  their  character  ‘Objectively’.  Being
which  Objectifies  and  which  is  alongside  the  present-at-hand  within-the-
world, is  characterized by a distinctive  kind  of  making-present.(xxiii) This
making-present is distinguished from the Present of circumspection in that
—above  all—the  kind  of  discovering  which  belongs  to  the  science  in
question  awaits  solely  the  discoveredness  of  the  present-at-hand.  This
awaiting  of  discoveredness  has  its  existentiell  basis  in  a  resoluteness  by
which Dasein projects itself towards its potentiality-for-Being in the ‘truth’.
This  projection  is  possible  because  Being-in-the-truth  makes  up  a  definite
way in which Dasein may exist. We shall not trace further how science has
its source in authentic existence. It is enough now if we understand that the
thematizing of entities within-the-world presupposes Being-in-the-world as
the basic state of Dasein, and if we understand how it does so.
 

xxiii.  The  thesis  that  all  cognition  has  ‘intuition’  as  its  goal,  has  the  temporal  meaning  that  all
cognizing  is  making  present.  Whether  every  science,  or  even  philosophical  cognition,  aims  at  a
making-present, need not be decided here.

Husserl uses the expression ‘make present’ in characterizing sensory perception. Cf. his Logische
Untersuchungen, first edition, 1901, vol. II, pp. 588 and 620. This ‘temporal’ way of describing this
phenomenon must have been suggested by the analysis of perception and intuition in general in terms
of  the  idea  of  intention. That  the  intentionality  of  ‘consciousness’  is  grounded  in  [Italics  in  newer
editions  only.—Tr.]  the  ecstatical  unity  of  Dasein,  and  how  this  is  the  case,  will  be  shown  in  the
following Division. [This Division has never been published.—Tr.]
 

1.  ‘  “entgegenwerfen”  ’.  Heidegger  is  here  calling  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  word  ‘object’

literally means ‘something thrown against’.

H. 364

 

 

If  the  thematizing  of  the  present-at-hand—the  scientific  projection  of
Nature—is  to  become  possible,  Dasein  must  transcend  the  entities
thematized.  Transcendence  does  not  consist  in  Objectifying,  but  is
presupposed  by  it.  If,  however,  the  thematizing  of  the  present-at-hand
within-the-world  is  a  change-over  from  the  concern  which  discovers  by
circumspection, then one’s ‘practical’ Being alongside the ready-to-hand is
something which a transcendence of Dasein must already underlie.

If, moreover, thematizing modifies and Articulates the understanding of
Being, then, in so far as Dasein, the entity which thematizes, exists, it must
already understand something like Being. Such understanding of Being can
remain  neutral.  In  that  case  readiness-to-hand  and  presence-at-hand  have
not yet been distinguished; still less have they been conceived ontologically.
But  if  Dasein  is  to  be  able  to  have  any  dealings  with  a  context  of
equipment,  it  must  understand  something  like  an  involvement,  even  if  it
does not  do so thematically: a world  must have been disclosed to  it.  With
Dasein’s factical existence, this world has been disclosed, if Dasein indeed
exists  essentially  as  Being-in-the-world.(1)  And  if  Dasein’s  Being  is
completely  grounded  in  temporality,  then  temporality  must  make  possible
Being-in-the-world 
this
transcendence in  turn  provides the  support for  concernful  Being  alongside
entities within-the-world, whether this Being is theoretical or practical.
 

therewith  Dasein’s 

transcendence; 

and 

1. In the older editions this sentence is introduced by ‘Und’ (‘And’).

(c) The Temporal Problem of the Transcendence of the World

Circumspective  concern  includes  the  understanding  of  a  totality  of
involvements, and this understanding is based upon a prior understanding of
the  relationships  of  the  “in-order-to”,  the”  towards-which”,  the  “towards-
this”,  and the  “for-the-sake-of”. The interconnection of these relationships
has  been  exhibited  earlier(xxiv)  as  “significance”.  Their  unity  makes  up
what  we  call  the  “world”.  The  question  arises  of  how  anything  like  the
world in its unity with Dasein is ontologically possible. In what way must
the world be, if Dasein is to be able to exist as Being-in-the-World?

Dasein exists for the sake of a potentiality-for-Being of itself. In existing,
it has been thrown; and as something thrown, it has been delivered over to
entities  which  it  needs  in  order  to  be  able  to  be  as  it  is—namely,  for  the
sake of itself. In so far as Dasein exists factically, it understands itself in the
way  its  “for-the-sake-of-itself”  is  thus  connected  with  some  current  “in-
order-to”.  That  inside  which  existing  Dasein  understands  itself,  is  ‘there’
along  with  its  factical  existence.  That  inside  which  one  primarily
understands  oneself  has  Dasein’s  kind  of  Being.  Dasein  is  its  world
existingly.
 

xxiv. Cf. Section 18, H. 87 ff.

H. 365

 

We have defined Dasein’s Being as “care”. The ontological meaning of
“care”  is  temporality.  We  have  shown  that  temporality  constitutes  the
disclosedness  of  the  “there”,  and  we  have  shown  how  it  does  so.  In  the
disclosedness of the “there” the world is disclosed along with it. The unity
of  significance—that  is,  the  ontological  constitution  of  the  world—must
then  likewise  be  grounded  in  temporality.  The  existential-temporal
condition for the possibility of the world lies in the fact that temporality, as
an  ecstatical  unity,  has  something  like  a  horizon.  Ecstases  are  not  simply
raptures  in  which  one  gets  carried  away.  Rather,  there  belongs  to  each
ecstasis a ‘whither’ to which one is carried away.(1) This “whither” of the
ecstasis  we  call  the  “horizonal  schema”.  In  each  of  the  three  ecstases  the
ecstatical horizon is different. The schema in which Dasein comes towards
itself futurally, whether authentically or inauthentically, is the “for-the-sake-
of-itself”. The  schema  in  which  Dasein  is  disclosed  to  itself  in  a  state-of-
mind  as  thrown,  is  to  be  taken  as  that  in  the  face  of  which  it  has  been
thrown  and  that  to  which  it  has  been  abandoned.  This  characterizes  the
horizonal  schema  of  what  has  been.  In  existing  for  the  sake  of  itself  in
abandonment to itself as something that has been thrown, Dasein, as Being-
alongside, is at the same time making present. The horizonal schema for the
Present is defined by the “in-order-to”.
 

1. ‘Die Ekstasen sind nicht einfach Entrückungen zu... Vielmehr gehört zur Ekstase ein “Wohin”

der Entrückung.’

The unity of the horizonal schemata of future, Present, and having been,
is  grounded  in  the  ecstatical  unity  of  temporality.  The  horizon  of
temporality  as  a  whole  determines  that  whereupon  [woraufhin]  factically
existing entities are essentially disclosed. With one’s factical Being-there, a
potentiality-for-Being is in each case projected in the horizon of the future,
one’s  ‘Being-already’  is  disclosed  in  the  horizon  of  having  been,  and  that
with which one concerns oneself is discovered in the horizon of the Present.
The  horizonal  unity  of  the  schemata  of  these  ecstases  makes  possible  the
primordial way in which the relationships of the “in-order-to” are connected
with  the  “for-the-sake-of”.  This  implies  that  on  the  basis  of  the  horizonal
constitution  of  the  ecstatical  unity  of  temporality,  there  belongs  to  that
entity which is in each case its own “there”, something like a world that has
been disclosed.

Just as the Present arises in the unity of the temporalizing of temporality
out  of  the  future  and  having  been,  the  horizon  of  a  Present  temporalizes
itself equiprimordially with those of the future and of having been. In so far
as  Dasein  temporalizes  itself,  a  world  is  too.  In  temporalizing  itself  with
regard to its Being as temporality, Dasein is(1) essentially ‘in a world’, by
reason of the ecstatico-horizonal constitution of that temporality. The world
is  neither  present-at-hand  nor  ready-to-hand,  but  temporalizes  itself  in
temporality. It ‘is’, with the “outside-of-itself” of the ecstases, ‘there’. If no
Dasein exists, no world is ‘there’ either.
 

1. Italics supplied in later editions only.

H. 366

 

The world is already presupposed in one’s Being alongside the ready-to-
hand  concernfully  and  factically,  in  one’s  thematizing  of  the  present-at-
hand, and in one’s discovering of this latter entity by Objectification; that is
to say, all these are possible only as ways of Being-in-the-world. Having its
ground [gründend] in the horizonal unity of ecstatical temporality, the world
is  transcendent.  It  must  already  have  been  ecstatically  disclosed  so  that  in
terms  of  it  entities  within-the-world  can  be  encountered.  Temporality
already maintains itself ecstatically within the horizons of its ecstases; and
in  temporalizing  itself,  it  comes  back  to  those  entities  which  are
encountered in the “there”. With Dasein’s factical existence, entities within-

the-world  are  already  encountered  too.  The  fact  that  such  entities  are
discovered  along  with  Dasein’s  own  “there”  of  existence,  is  not  left  to
Dasein’s  discretion.  Only  what  it  discovers  and  discloses  on  occasion,  in
what  direction  it  does  so,  how  and  how  far  it  does  so—only  these  are
matters  for  Dasein’s  freedom,  even  if  always  within  the  limitations  of  its
thrownness.

Thus the significance-relationships which determine the structure of the
world  are  not  a  network  of  forms  which  a  worldless  subject  has  laid  over
some  kind  of  material.  What  is  rather  the  case  is  that  factical  Dasein,
understanding  itself  and  its  world  ecstatically  in  the  unity  of  the  “there”,
comes  back  from  these  horizons  to  the  entities  encountered  within  them.
Coming back to these entities understandingly is the existential meaning of
letting  them  be  encountered  by  making  them  present;  that  is  why  we  call
them entities “within-the-world”. The world is, as it were, already ‘further
outside’  than  any  Object  can  ever  be.  The  ‘problem  of  transcendence’
cannot be brought round to the question of how a subject comes out to an
Object,  where  the  aggregate  of  Objects  is  identified  with  the  idea  of  the
world. Rather we must ask: what makes it ontologically possible for entities
to be encountered within-the-world and Objectified as so encountered? This
can  be  answered  by  recourse  to  the  transcendence  of  the  world—a
transcendence with an ecstatico-horizonal foundation.

If the ‘subject’ gets conceived ontologically as an existing Dasein whose
Being  is  grounded  in  temporality,  then  one  must  say  that  the  world  is
‘subjective’.  But  in  that  case,  this  ‘subjective’  world,  as  one  that  is
temporally transcendent, is ‘more Objective’ than any possible ‘Object’.

When Being-in-the-world is traced back to the ecstatico-horizonal unity
of  temporality,  the  existential-ontological  possibility  of  this  basic  state  of
Dasein  is  made  intelligible.  At  the  same  time  it  becomes  plain  that  a
concrete  working-out  of  the  world-structure  in  general  and  its  possible
variations can be tackled only if the ontology of possible entities within-the-
world is oriented securely enough by clarifying the idea of Being in general.
If an Interpretation of this idea is to be possible, the temporality of Dasein
must  be  exhibited  beforehand;  here  our  characterization  of  Being-in-the-
world will be of service.

70. The Temporality of the Spatiality that is Characteristic of Dasein

 

 

H. 367

Though  the  expression  ‘temporality’  does  not  signify  what  one
understands by “time” when one talks about ‘space and time’, nevertheless
spatiality seems to make up another basic attribute of Dasein corresponding
to  temporality.  Thus  with  Dasein’s  spatiality,  existential-temporal  analysis
seems to come to a limit, so that this entity which we call “Dasein”, must be
considered  as  ‘temporal’  ‘and  also’  as  spatial  coordinately.  Has  our
existential-temporal analysis of Dasein thus been brought to a halt by that
phenomenon with which we have become acquainted as the spatiality that is
characteristic  of  Dasein,  and  which  we  have  pointed  out  as  belonging  to
Being-in-the-world?(xxv)

If  in  the  course  of  our  existential  Interpretation  we  were  to  talk  about
Dasein’s having a ‘spatio-temporal’ character, we could not mean that this
entity  is  present-at-hand  ‘in  space  and  also  in  time’;  this  needs  no  further
discussion.  Temporality  is  the  meaning  of  the  Being  of  care.  Dasein’s
constitution and its ways to be are possible ontologically only on the basis
of  temporality,  regardless  of  whether  this  entity  occurs  ‘in  time’  or  not.
Hence Dasein’s specific spatiality must be grounded in temporality. On the
other  hand,  the  demonstration  that  this  spatiality  is  existentially  possible
only through temporality, cannot aim either at deducing space from time or
at  dissolving  it  into  pure  time.  If  Dasein’s  spatiality  is  ‘embraced’  by
temporality  in  the  sense  of  being  existentially  founded  upon  it,  then  this
connection between them (which is to be clarified in what follows) is also
different  from  the  priority  of  time  over  space  in  Kant’s  sense.  To  say  that
our empirical representations of what is present-at-hand ‘in space’ run their
course  ‘in  time’  as  psychical  occurrences,  so  that  the  ‘physical’  occurs
mediately  ‘in  time’  also,  is  not  to  give  an  existential-ontological
Interpretation  of  space  as  a  form  of  intuition,  but  rather  to  establish
ontically that what is psychically present-at-hand runs its course ‘in time’.
 

xxv. Cf. Sections 22-24, H. 101, ff.

H. 368

 

We  must  now  make  an  existential-analytical  inquiry  as  to  the  temporal
conditions,  for  the  possibility  of  the  spatiality  that  is  characteristic  of
Dasein—the  spatiality  upon  which  in  turn  is  founded  the  uncovering  of
space  within-the-world.  We  must  first  remember  in  what  way  Dasein  is
spatial.  Dasein  can  be  spatial  only  as  care,  in  the  sense  of  existing  as
factically  falling.  Negatively  this  means  that  Dasein  is  never  present-at-
hand in space, not even proximally. Dasein does not fill up a bit of space as
a Real Thing or item of equipment would, so that the boundaries dividing it
from  the  surrounding  space  would  themselves  just  define  that  space
spatially. Dasein takes space in; this is to be understood literally.(1) It is by
no  means  just  present-at-hand  in  a  bit  of  space  which  its  body  fills  up.  In
existing, it has already made room for its own leeway. It determines its own
location  in  such  a  manner  that  it  comes  back  from  the  space  it  has  made
room  for  to  the  ‘place’  which  it  has  reserved.(2)  To  be  able  to  say  that
Dasein  is  present-at-hand  at  a  position  in  space,  we  must  first  take
[auffassen] this  entity  in  a  way  which  is  ontologically  inappropriate.  Nor
does the distinction between the ‘spatiality’ of an extended Thing and that
of Dasein lie in the fact that Dasein knows about space; for taking space in
[das Raum-einnehmen] is so far from identical with a ‘representing’ of the
spatial, that it is presupposed by it instead. Neither may Dasein’s spatiality
be  interpreted  as  an  imperfection  which  adheres  to  existence  by  reason  of
the fatal ‘linkage of the spirit to a body’. On the contrary, because Dasein is
‘spiritual’,  and  only  because  of  this,  it  can  be  spatial  in  a  way  which
remains essentially impossible for any extended corporeal Thing.
 

1. ‘Das Dasein nimmt—im wörtlichen Verstande—Raum ein.’ The expression ‘nimmt Raum ein’
would ordinarily be translatable as ‘occupies space’ or even ‘takes up space’. But Heidegger is here
interpreting it in a way which is closer to the root meaning.

2. ‘Existierend hat es sich je schon einen Spielraum eingeräumt. Es bestimmt je seinen eigenen
Ort so, dass es aus dem eingeräumten Raum auf den “Platz” zurückkommt, den es belegt hat.’ This
passage can be read in several ways. ‘Spielraum’ (our ‘leeway’) means literally a ‘space—or room—
for  playing’.  The  expression  ‘belegen  einen  Platz’  ordinarily  means  to  book  or  reserve  a  seat  at  a
theatre or some other place of entertainment; but in a more general and basic sense, ‘belegen’ (which
is  a  word  of  many  meanings)  can  also  mean  to  spread  something  over  something  else  so  as  to
‘occupy’ it completely—as one spreads a slice of bread with butter or covers a wall with plaster. On
‘einräumen’ see our note 1, H. 111 above.

Dasein’s making room  for  itself is  constituted by  directionality and de-
severance. How is anything of this sort existentially possible on the basis of
Dasein’s  temporality?  The  function  of  temporality  as  the  foundation  for

is 

of 

equipment  which 

Dasein’s spatiality will be indicated briefly, but no more than is necessary
for  our  later  discussions  of  the  ontological  meaning  of  the  ‘coupling
together’ of space and time. To Dasein’s making room for itself belongs the
self-directive discovery of something like a region. By this expression what
we  have  in  mind  in  the  first  instance  is  the  “whither”  for  the  possible
ready-to-hand
belonging-somewhere 
environmentally  and  which  can  be  placed.  Whenever  one  comes  across
equipment,  handles  it,  or  moves  it  around  or  out  of  the  way,  some  region
has  already  been  discovered.  Concernful  Being-in-the-world  is  directional
—self-directive.  Belonging-somewhere  has  an  essential  relationship  to
involvement.  It  always  Determines  itself  factically  in  terms  of  the
involvement-context  of  the  equipment  with  which  one  concerns  oneself.
Relationships  of  involvement  are  intelligible  only  within  the  horizon  of  a
world that has been disclosed. Their horizonal character, moreover, is what
first  makes  possible  the  specific  horizon  of  the  “whither”  of  belonging-
somewhere regionally. The self-directive discovery of a region is grounded
in  an  ecstatically  retentive  awaiting  of  the  “hither”  and  “thither”  that  are
possible. Making room for oneself is a directional awaiting of a region, and
as such it is equiprimordially a bringing-close (de-severing*) of the ready-
to-hand  and  present-at-hand.  Out  of  the  region  that  has  been  discovered
beforehand,  concern  comes  back  de-severantly  to  that  which  is  closest.
Both  bringing-close  and  the  estimating  and  measurement  of  distances
within  that  which  has  been  de-severed  and  is  present-at-hand  within-the-
world,  are  grounded  in  a  making-present  belonging  to  the  unity  of  that
temporality in which directionality too becomes possible.

H. 369

 

Because Dasein as temporality is ecstatico-horizonal in its Being, it can
take  along  with  it  a  space  for  which  it  has  made  room,  and  it  can  do  so
factically and constantly. With regard to that space which it has ecstatically
taken  in,  the  “here”  of  its  current  factical  situation  [Lage  bzw.  Situation]
never  signifies  a  position  in  space,  but  signifies  rather  the  leeway  of  the
range of that equipmental totality with which it is most closely concerned—
a  leeway  which  has  been  opened  up  for  it  in  directionality  and  de-
severance.

Bringing-close  makes  possible  the  kind  of  handling  and  Being-busy
which  is  ‘absorbed  in  the  thing  one  is  handling’  [“in  der  Sache
aufgehende”]; and in such bringing-close, the essential structure of care—
falling—makes itself known. In falling, and therefore also in the bringing-
close which is founded ‘in the present’, the forgetting which awaits, leaps
after  the  Present;  this  is  what  is  distinctive  in  the  existential-temporal
Constitution of falling.(1) When we make something present by bringing it
close  from  its  “thence”  [seinem  Dorther],  the  making-present  forgets  the
“yonder”  [das  Dort]  and  loses  itself  in  itself.  Thus  it  comes  about  that  if
‘observation’  of  entities  within-the-world  commences  in  such  a  making-
present,  the  illusion  arises  that  ‘at  first’  only  a  Thing  is  present-at-hand,
here of course, but indefinitely—in a space in general.
 

1.  ‘Dessen  existenzial-zeitliche  Konstitution  ist  dadurch  ausgezeichnet,  dass  in  ihm  und  damit
auch  in  der  “gegenwärtig”  fundierten  Näherung  das  gewärtigende  Vergessen  der  Gegenwart
nachspringt.’

Only on the basis of its ecstatico-horizonal temporality is it possible for
Dasein to break into space. The world is not present-at-hand in space; yet
only  within  a  world  does  space  let  itself  be  discovered.  The  ecstatical
temporality  of  the  spatiality  that  is  characteristic  of  Dasein,  makes  it
intelligible  that  space  is  independent  of  time;  but  on  the  other  hand,  this
same temporality also makes intelligible Dasein’s ‘dependence’ on space—
a ‘dependence’ which manifests itself in the well-known phenomenon that
both  Dasein’s  interpretation  of  itself  and  the  whole  stock  of  significations
which belong to language in general are dominated through and through by
‘spatial  representations’.  This  priority  of  the  spatial  in  the  Articulation  of
concepts and significations has its basis not in some specific power which
space  possesses,  but  in  Dasein’s  kind  of  Being.  Temporality  is  essentially
falling,  and  it  loses  itself  in  making  present;  not  only  does  it  understand
itself  circumspectively  in  terms  of  objects  of  concern  which  are  ready-to-
hand,  but  from  those  spatial  relationships  which  making-present  is
constantly  meeting  in  the  ready-to-hand  as  having  presence,  it  takes  its
clues for Articulating that which has been understood and can be interpreted
in the understanding in general.

71. The Temporal Meaning of Dasein’s Everydayness

 

 

H. 370

We have given an Interpretation of some structures which are essential to
Dasein’s state-of-Being, and we have done so before exhibiting temporality,
but  with  the  aim  of  leading  up  to  this.  Our  analysis  of  the  temporality  of
concern has shown that these structures must be taken back into temporality
existentially.  At  the  very  start  of  our  analytic  we  did  not  choose  as  our
theme  any  definite  and  distinctive  possibility  of  Dasein’s  existence;  our
analytic  was  oriented  rather  by  the  average  way  of  existing,  which  has
nothing conspicuous about it. We called that kind of Being in which Dasein
maintains itself proximally and for the most part “everydayness”.(xxvi)

What  this  expression  signifies  at  bottom  when  delimited  ontologically,
remains obscure. At the beginning of our study, moreover, we could not see
the  existential-ontological  meaning  of
any  way  of  even  making 
“everydayness” a problem. By now, however, some light has been cast on
the meaning of Dasein’s Being as temporality. Can there still be any doubt
as to the existential-temporal signification of the term “everydayness”? All
the  same,  we  are  far  removed  from  an  ontological  conception  of  this
phenomenon.  It  even  remains  questionable  whether  the  explication  of
temporality which we have so far carried through is sufficient to delimit the
existential meaning of “everydayness”.

“Everydayness”  manifestly  stands  for  that  way  of  existing  in  which
Dasein maintains itself ‘every day’ [“alle Tage”]. And yet this ‘every day’
does not signify the sum of those ‘days’ which have been allotted to Dasein
in  its  ‘lifetime’.  Though  this  ‘every  day’  is  not  to  be  understood
calendrically, there is still an overtone of some such temporal character in
the signification of the ‘everyday’ [“Alltag”]. But what we have primarily
in  mind in  the  expression “everydayness” is  a definite “how” of existence
by which Dasein is dominated through and through ‘for life’ [“zeitlebens”].
In our analyses we have often used the expression ‘proximally and for the
most part’. ‘Proximally’ signifies the way in which Dasein is ‘manifest’ in
the  “with-one-another”  of  publicness,  even  if  ‘at  bottom’  everydayness  is
precisely  something  which,  in  an  existentiell  manner,  it  has  ‘surmounted’.
‘For  the  most  part’  signifies  the  way  in  which  Dasein  shows  itself  for
Everyman, not always, but ‘as a rule’.
 

xxvi. Cf. Section 9, H. 42 ff.

H. 371

 

“Everydayness”  means  the  “how”  in  accordance  with  which  Dasein
‘lives  unto  the  day’  [“in  den  Tag  hineinlebt”],  whether  in  all  its  ways  of
behaving  or  only  in  certain  ones  which  have  been  prescribed  by  Being-
with-one-another. To this “how” there belongs further the comfortableness
of  the  accustomed,  even  if  it  forces  one  to  do  something  burdensome  and
‘repugnant’.  That  which  will  come  tomorrow  (and  this  is  what  everyday
concern  keeps  awaiting)  is  ‘eternally  yesterday’s’.  In  everydayness
everything is all one and the same, but whatever the day may bring is taken
as  diversification.  Everydayness  is  determinative  for  Dasein  even  when  it
has not chosen the “they” for its ‘hero’.

These  manifold  characteristics  of  everydayness,  however,  by  no  means
designate it as a mere ‘aspect’ afforded by Dasein when ‘one looks at’ the
things  men  do.  Everydayness  is  a  way  to  be—to  which,  of  course,  that
which  is  publicly  manifest  belongs.  But  it  is  more  or  less  familiar  to  any
‘individual’ Dasein as a way of existing which it may have as its own, and
it is familiar to it through that state-of-mind which consists of a pallid lack
of mood. In everydayness Dasein can undergo dull ‘suffering’, sink away in
the dullness of it, and evade it by seeking new ways in which its dispersion
in its affairs may be further dispersed. In the moment of vision, indeed, and
often just ‘for that moment’, existence can even gain the mastery over the
“everyday”; but it can never extinguish it.

That which is ontically so familiar in the way Dasein has been factically
interpreted  that  we  never  pay  any  heed  to  it,  hides  enigma  after  enigma
existential-ontologically.  The  ‘natural’  horizon  for  starting  the  existential
analytic of Dasein is only seemingly self-evident.

But after the Interpretation of temporality which we have given thus far,
do  we  find  ourselves  in  any  more  promising  a  situation  with  regard  to
delimiting  the  structure  of  everydayness  existentially?  Or  does  this
bewildering  phenomenon  make  the  inadequacy  of  our  explication  of
temporality  all  too  patent?  Have  we  not  hitherto  been  constantly
immobilizing  Dasein  in  certain  situations,  while  we  have,  ‘consistently’
with  this,  been  disregarding  the  fact  that  in  living  unto  its  days  Dasein
stretches  itself  along  ‘temporally’  in  the  sequence  of  those  days?(1)  The

“it’s  all  one  and  the  same”,  the  accustomed,  the  ‘like  yesterday,  so  today
and  tomorrow’,  and  the  ‘for  the  most  part’—these  are  not  to  be  grasped
without recourse to this ‘temporal’ stretching-along of Dasein.

H. 372

 

And  is  it  not  also  a  Fact  of  existing  Dasein  that  in  spending  its  time  it
takes  ‘time’  into  its  reckoning  from  day  to  day  and  regulates  this
‘reckoning’  astronomically  and  calendrically?  Only  if  both  Dasein’s
everyday  ‘historizing’(2)  and  the  reckoning  with  ‘time’  with  which  it
concerns  itself  in  this  historizing,  are  included  in  our  Interpretation  of
Dasein’s temporality, will our orientation be embracing enough to enable us
to make a problem of the ontological meaning of everydayness as such. But
because at bottom we mean by the term “everydayness” nothing else than
temporality,  while  temporality  is  made  possible  by  Dasein’s  Being,(3)  an
adequate  conceptual  delimitation  of  everydayness  can  succeed  only  in  a
framework  in  which  the  meaning  of  Being  in  general  and  its  possible
variations are discussed in principle.
 

1. ‘Haben wir bisher nicht ständig das Dasein auf gewisse Lagen und Situationen stillgelegt und
“konsequent” missachtet, dass es sich, in seine Tage hineinlebend, in der Folge seiner Tage “zeitlich”
erstreckt?’ The older editions have ‘stillgestellt’ rather than ‘stillgelegt.’

2. ‘ “Geschehen” ’. Cf. our note 1, H. 19 above.
3.  ‘Weil  jedoch  mit  dem  Titel  Alltäglichkeit  im  Grunde  nichts  anderes  gemeint  ist  als  die

Zeitlichkeit, diese aber das Sein des Daseins ermöglicht...’

V: TEMPORALITY AND HISTORICALITY

72. Existential-ontological Exposition of the Problem of History

 

 

ALL our efforts in the existential analytic serve the one aim of finding a
possibility of answering the question of the meaning of Being(1) in general.
To work out this question,(1) we need to delimit that very phenomenon in
which  something  like  Being  becomes  accessible—the  phenomenon  of  the
understanding  of  Being.  But  this  phenomenon  is  one  that  belongs  to
Dasein’s state of Being. Only after this entity has been Interpreted in a way
which  is  sufficiently  primordial,  can  we  have  a  conception  of  the
understanding  of Being,  which is  included  in  its very state  of Being; only
on  this  basis  can  we  formulate  the  question  of  the  Being  which  is
understood  in  this  understanding,  and  the  question  of  what  such
understanding ‘presupposes’.
 

1. Italics provided only in the later editions.

Even  though  many  structures  of  Dasein  when  taken  singly  are  still
obscure,  it  seems  that  by  casting  light  upon  temporality  as  the  primordial
condition  for  the  possibility  of  care,  we  have  reached  the  primordial
Interpretation  of  Dasein  which  we  require.  We  have  exhibited  temporality
with a view to Dasein’s authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. We have
then  confirmed  the  temporal  Interpretation  of  care  by  demonstrating  the
temporality of concernful Being-in-the-world. Our analysis of the authentic
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole  has  revealed  that  in  care  is  rooted  an
equiprimordial  connectedness  of  death,  guilt,  and  conscience.  Can  Dasein
be understood in a way that is more primordial than in the projection of its
authentic existence?

H. 373

 

Although  up  till  now  we  have  seen  no  possibility  of  a  more  radical
approach to the existential analytic, yet, if we have regard for the preceding

discussion  of  the  ontological  meaning  of  everydayness,  a  difficult
consideration comes to light. Have we indeed brought the whole of Dasein,
as  regards  its  authentically  Being-a-whole,  into  the  fore-having  of  our
existential analysis? It may be that a formulation of the question as related
to Dasein’s totality, possesses a genuinely unequivocal character 
ontologically. It may be that as regards Being-towards-the-end the question
itself  may  even  have  found  its  answer.  But  death  is  only  the  ‘end’  of
Dasein;  and,  taken  formally,  it  is  just  one  of  the  ends  by  which  Dasein’s
totality  is  closed  round.  The  other  ‘end’,  however,  is  the  ‘beginning’,  the
‘birth’.  Only  that  entity  which  is  ‘between’  birth  and  death  presents  the
whole  which  we  have  been  seeking.  Accordingly  the  orientation  of  our
analytic  has  so  far  remained  ‘one-sided’,  in  spite  of  all  its  tendencies
towards  a  consideration  of  existent  Being-a-whole  and  in  spite  of  the
genuineness  with  which  authentic  and  inauthentic  Being-towards-death
have been explicated. Dasein has been our theme only in the way in which
it  exists  ‘facing  forward’,  as  it  were,  leaving  ‘behind  it’  all  that  has  been.
Not only has Being-towards-the-beginning remained unnoticed; but so too,
and  above  all,  has  the  way  in  which  Dasein  stretches along  between birth
and death. The ‘connectedness of life’, in which Dasein somehow maintains
itself  constantly,  is  precisely  what  we  have  overlooked  in  our  analysis  of
Being-a-whole.

We have regarded temporality as the meaning of the Being of Dasein’s
totality; must we not now take this back, even if what we have described as
the ‘connectedness’ between birth and death is ontologically quite obscure?
Or does temporality, as we have exhibited it, first of all give us the basis on
which  to  provide  an  unequivocal  direction  for  the  existential-ontological
question  of  this  ‘connectedness’?  In  the  field  of  these  investigations,  it  is
perhaps already a gain, when we learn not to take problems too lightly.

What  seems  ‘simpler’  than  to  characterize  the  ‘connectedness  of  life’
between birth and death? It consists of a sequence of Experiences ‘in time’.
But if one makes a more penetrating study of this way of characterizing the
‘connectedness’ in question, and especially of the ontological assumptions
behind  it,  the  remarkable  upshot  is  that,  in  this  sequence  of  Experiences,
what  is  ‘really’  ‘actual’  is,  in  each  case,  just  that  Experience  which  is
present-at-hand  ‘in  the  current  “now”  ’,  while  those  Experiences  which
have passed away or are only coming along, either are no longer or are not
yet ‘actual’. Dasein traverses the span of time granted to it between the two

boundaries, and it does so in such a way that, in each case, it is ‘actual’ only
in the “now”, and hops, as it were, through the sequence of “flows” of its
own ‘time’. Thus it is said that Dasein is ‘temporal’. In spite of the constant
changing  of these Experiences, the  Self  maintains itself throughout  with  a
certain selfsameness. Opinions diverge as to how that which thus persists is
to  be  defined,  and  how  one  is  to  determine  what  relation  it  may  possibly
have to the changing Experiences. The Being of this perseveringly changing
connectedness  of  Experiences  remains  indefinite.  But  at  bottom,  whether
one likes it or not, in this way of characterizing the connectedness of life,
one has posited something present-at-hand ‘in time’, though something that
is obviously ‘un-Thinglike’.

H. 374

 

If  we  have  regard  for  what  we  have  worked  out  under  the  title  of
“temporality”  as  the  meaning  of  the  Being  of  care,  we  find  that  while  the
ordinary interpretation of Dasein, within its own limits, has its justification
and is sufficient, we cannot carry through a genuine ontological analysis of
the  way  Dasein  stretches  along  between  birth  and  death  if  we  take  this
interpretation as our clue, nor can we  even fix  upon  such an analysis as a
problem.

Dasein  does  not  exist  as  the  sum  of  the  momentary  actualities  of
Experiences  which  come  along  successively  and  disappear.  Nor  is  there  a
sort of framework which this succession gradually fills up. For how is such
a  framework  to  be  present-at-hand,  where,  in  each  case,  only  the
Experience  one  is  having  ‘right  now’  is  ‘actual’,(1)  and  the  boundaries  of
the  framework—the  birth  which  is  past  and  the  death  which  is  only
oncoming—lack  actuality?  At  bottom,  even  in  the  ordinary  way  of  taking
the ‘connectedness of life’, one does not think of this as a framework drawn
tense ‘outside’ of Dasein and spanning it round, but one rightly seeks this
connectedness  in  Dasein  itself.  When,  however,  one  tacitly  regards  this
entity ontologically as something present-at-hand ‘in time’, any attempt at
an ontological characterization of the Being ‘between’ birth and death will
break down.
 

1. ‘…wo doch je nur das “aktuelle” Erlebnis “wirklich” ist…’

Dasein  does  not  fill  up  a  track  or  stretch  ‘of  life’—one  which  is
somehow present-at-hand—with the phases of its momentary actualities. It
stretches  itself  along  in  such  a  way  that  its  own  Being  is  constituted  in
advance  as  a  stretching-along.  The  ‘between’  which  relates  to  birth  and
death  already  lies  in  the  Being  of  Dasein.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  by  no
means the case that Dasein ‘is’ actual in a point of time, and that, apart from
this,  it  is  ‘surrounded’  by  the  non-actuality  of  its  birth  and  death.
Understood  existentially,  birth  is  not  and  never  is  something  past  in  the
sense of something no longer present-at-hand; and death is just as far from
having the kind of Being of something still outstanding, not yet present-at-
hand  but  coming  along.  Factical  Dasein  exists  as  born;  and,  as  born,  it  is
already  dying,  in  the  sense  of  Being-towards-death.  As  long  as  Dasein
factically exists, both the ‘ends’ and their ‘between’ are, and they are in the
only  way  which  is  possible  on  the  basis  of  Dasein’s  Being  as  care.
Thrownness  and  that  Being  towards  death  in  which  one  either  flees  it  or
anticipates it, form a unity; and in this unity birth and death are ‘connected’
in a manner characteristic of Dasein. As care, Dasein is the ‘between’.

H. 375

 

In  temporality,  however,  the  constitutive  totality  of  care  has  a  possible
basis for its unity. Accordingly it is within the horizon of Dasein’s temporal
constitution  that  we  must  approach  the  ontological  clarification  of  the
‘connectedness of life’—that is to say, the stretching-along, the movement,
and  the  persistence  which  are  specific  for  Dasein.  The  movement
[Bewegtheit]  of  existence  is  not  the  motion  [Bewegung]  of  something
present-at-hand. It is definable in terms of the way Dasein stretches along.
The  specific  movement  in  which  Dasein  is  stretched  along  and  stretches
itself  along,  we  call  its  “historizing”.(1)  The  question  of  Dasein’s
‘connectedness’  is  the  ontological  problem  of  Dasein’s  historizing.  To  lay
bare the structure of historizing,  and the  existential-temporal conditions of
its possibility, signifies that one has achieved an ontological  understanding
of historicality.(2)

With  the  analysis  of  the  specific  movement  and  persistence  which
belong  to  Dasein’s  historizing,  we  come  back  in  our  investigation  to  the
problem which we touched upon immediately before exposing temporality
to view—the question of the constancy of the Self, which we defined as the

“who” of Dasein.(i) Self-constancy(3) is a way of Being of Dasein, and is
therefore grounded in a specific temporalizing of temporality. The analysis
of  historizing  will  lead  us  face  to  face  with  the  problems  of  a  thematical
investigation of temporalizing as such.
 

i. Cf. Section 64, H. 316 ff.

 

1.  Die  spezifische  Bewegtheit  des  erstreckten  Sicherstreckens  nennen  wir  das  Geschehen  des

Daseins.’ On ‘Geschehen’ see our note 1, H. 19 above.

2. On ‘historicality’ (‘Geschichtlichkeit’) see our note 2, H. 10 above.
3.  ‘Selbst-ständigkeit’.  Here  we  follow  the  reading  of  the  older  editions  in  which  the  hyphen
comes at the end of a line. In the newer editions the hyphen is omitted; but presumably Heidegger
intends the same expanded spelling which we have already met on H. 322 and H. 332. See our notes
ad loc.

If the question of historicality leads us back to these ‘sources’, then the
locus of the problem of history has already been decided. This locus is  not
to be sought in historiology as the science of history. Even if the problem of
‘history’ is treated in accordance with a theory of science, not only aiming
at the ‘epistemological’ clarification of the historiological way of grasping
things  (Simmel)  or  at  the  logic  with  which  the  concepts  of  historiological
presentation are formed (Rickert), but doing so with an orientation towards
‘the side of the object’, then, as long as the question is formulated this way,
history  becomes  in  principle  accessible  only  as  the  Object  of  a  science.
Thus  the  basic  phenomenon  of  history,  which  is  prior  to  any  possible
thematizing  by  historiology  and  underlies  it,  has  been  irretrievably  put
aside.  How  history  can  become  a  possible  object  for  historiology  is
something that may be gathered only from the kind of Being which belongs
to  the  historical—from  historicality,  and  from  the  way  it  is  rooted  in
temporality.

H. 376

 

If we are to cast light on historicality itself in terms of temporality, and
primordially in terms of temporality that is authentic, then it is essential to
this task that we can carry it out only by construing it phenomenologically.
(ii) The existential-ontological constitution of historicality has been covered
up by the way Dasein’s history is ordinarily interpreted; we must get hold of
it in spite of all this. The existential  way  of construing  historicality has its

definite supports in the ordinary understanding of Dasein, and is guided by
those existential structures at which we have hitherto arrived.

We shall first describe the ordinary ways in which history is conceived,
so that we may give our investigation an orientation as to those items which
are commonly held to be essential for history. Here, it must be made plain
what  is  primordially  considered  as  historical.  The  point  of  attack  for
expounding the ontological problem of historicality will thus be designated.
Our  Interpretation  of  Dasein’s  authentic  potentiality-for-Being-a-whole
and our analysis of care as temporality—an analysis which has arisen from
this 
for  construing  historicality
the  clue 
existentially.  The  existential  projection  of  Dasein’s  historicality  merely
reveals what already lies enveloped in the temporalizing of temporality. In
accordance  with  the  way  in  which  historicality  is  rooted  in  care,  Dasein
exists, in each case, as authentically or inauthentically historical. It becomes
plain  that  Dasein’s  inauthentic  historicality  lies  in  that  which—under  the
title of “everydayness”—we have looked upon, in the existential analytic of
Dasein, as the horizon that is closest to us.

Interpretation—offer  us 

Disclosing  and  interpreting  belong  essentially  to  Dasein’s  historizing.
Out of this kind of Being of the entity which exists historically, there arises
the  existentiell  possibility  of  disclosing  history  explicitly  and  getting  it  in
our  grasp.  The  fact  that  we  can  make  history  our  theme—that  is  to  say,
disclose it historiologically—is the presupposition for the possibility of the
way  one  ‘builds  up  the  historical  world  in  the  humane  sciences’.  The
existential  Interpretation  of  historiology  as  a  science  aims  solely  at
demonstrating  its  ontological  derivation  from  Dasein’s  historicality.  Only
from  here  can  we  stake  out  the  boundaries  within  which  any  theory  of
science  that  is  oriented  to  the  factical  workings  of  science,  may  expose
itself to the accidental factors in its way of formulating questions.

In  analysing  the  historicality  of  Dasein  we  shall  try  to  show  that  this
entity  is  not  ‘temporal’  because  it  ‘stands  in  history’,  but  that,  on  the
contrary, it exists historically and can so exist only because it is temporal in
the very basis of its Being.
 

ii. Cf. Section 63, H. 310 ff.

H. 377

 

Nevertheless,  Dasein  must  also  be  called  ‘temporal’  in  the  sense  of
Being  ‘in  time’.  Even  without  a  developed  historiology,  factical  Dasein
needs and uses a calendar and a clock. Whatever may happen ‘to Dasein’, it
experiences  it  as  happening  ‘in  time’.  In  the  same  way,  the  processes  of
Nature,  whether  living  or  lifeless,  are  encountered  ‘in  time’.  They  are
within-time.  So  while  our  analysis  of  how  the  ‘time’  of  within-time-ness
has  its  source  in  temporality  will  be  deferred  until  the  next  chapter,(iii)  it
would be easy to put this before our discussion of the connection between
historicality and temporality. The historical is ordinarily characterized with
the  help  of 
this  ordinary
time  of  within-time-ness.  But 
characterization  is  to  be  stripped  of  its  seeming  self-evidence  and
exclusiveness,  historicality  must  first  be  ‘deduced’  purely  in  terms  of
Dasein’s  primordial  temporality;  this  is  demanded  even  by  the  way  these
are  ‘objectively’ connected. Since,  however,  time  as within-time-ness also
‘stems’  from  the  temporality  of  Dasein,  historicality  and  within-time-ness
turn  out  to  be  equiprimordial.  Thus,  within  its  limits,  the  ordinary
interpretation of the temporal character of history is justified.

the 

if 

After  this  first  characterization  of  the  course  of  the  ontological
exposition of historicality in terms of temporality, do we still need explicit
assurance  that  the  following  investigation  does  not  rest  upon  a  belief  that
the problem of history is to be solved by a coup de main? The  poverty of
the  ‘categorial’  means  at  our  disposal,  and  the  unsureness  of  the  primary
ontological horizons, become the more obtrusive, the more the problem of
history  is  traced  to  its  primordial  roots.  In  the  following  study,  we  shall
content  ourselves  with  indicating  the  ontological  locus  of  the  problem  of
historicality.  The  researches  of  Dilthey  were,  for  their  part,  pioneering
work;  but  today’s  generation  has  not  as  yet  made  them  its  own.  In  the
following analysis the issue is solely one of furthering their adoption.

Our exposition of the existential problem of historicality—an exposition
which  is  necessarily  limited,  moreover,  in  that  its  goal  is  one  of
fundamental  ontology—is  divided  up  as 
the  ordinary
understanding  of  history,  and  Dasein’s  historizing  (Section  73);  the  basic
constitution of historicality (Section 74); Dasein’s historicality, and world-
history  (Section  75);  the  existential  source  of  historiology  in  Dasein’s
historicality (Section 76); the connection of the foregoing exposition of the
problem  of  historicality  with  the  researches  of  Dilthey  and  the  ideas  of
Count Yorck (Section 77).

follows: 

iii. Cf. Section 80, H. 411 ff.

 

 

 

H. 378

73. The Ordinary Understanding of History, and Dasein’s Historizing

Our  next  aim  is  to  find  the  right  position  for  attacking  the  primordial
question of the essence of history—that is to say, for construing historicality
existentially.  This  position  is  designated  by  that  which  is  primordially
historical.  We  shall  begin  our  study,  therefore,  by  characterizing  what  one
has  in  view  in  using  the  expressions  ‘history’  and  ‘historical’  in  the
ordinary  interpretation  of  Dasein.  These  expressions  get  used  in  several
ways.

The  most  obvious  ambiguity  of  the  term  ‘history’  is  one  that  has  often
been noticed, and there is nothing ‘fuzzy’ about it. It evinces itself in that
this term may mean the ‘historical actuality’ as well as the possible science
of  it.  We  shall  provisionally  eliminate  the  signification  of  ‘history’  in  the
sense of a “science of history” (historiology).

The expression ‘history’ has various significations with which one has in
view  neither  the  science  of  history  nor  even  history  as  an  Object,  but  this
very  entity  itself,  not  necessarily  Objectified.  Among  such  significations,
that in which this entity is understood as something past,  may  well  be the
pre-eminent usage. This signification is evinced in the kind of talk in which
we  say  that  something  or  other  “already  belongs  to  history”.  Here  ‘past’
means  “no  longer  present-at-hand”,  or  even  “still  present-at-hand  indeed,
but without having any ‘effect’ on the ‘Present’ ”. Of course, the historical
as that which is past has also the opposite signification, when we say, “One
cannot  get  away  from  history.”  Here,  by  “history”,  we  have  in  view  that
which is past, but which nevertheless is still having effects. Howsoever, the
historical, as that which is past, is understood to be related to the ‘Present’
in  the  sense  of  what  is  actual  ‘now’  and  ‘today’,  and  to  be  related  to  it,
either  positively  or  privatively,  in  such  a  way  as  to  have  effects  upon  it.
Thus  ‘the  past’  has  a  remarkable  double  meaning;  the  past  belongs
irretrievably to an earlier time; it belonged to the events of that time; and in
spite of that, it can still be present-at-hand ‘now’—for instance, the remains

of  a  Greek  temple.  With  the  temple,  a  ‘bit  of  the  past’  is  still  ‘in  the
present’.

What we next have in mind with the term “history” is not so much ‘the
past’  in  the  sense  of  that  which  is  past,  but  rather  derivation  [Herkunft]
from  such  a  past.  Anything  that  ‘has  a  history’  stands  in  the  context  of  a
becoming. In such becoming, ‘development’ is sometimes a rise, sometimes
a fall. What ‘has a history’ in this way can, at the same time, ‘make’ such
history.  As  ‘epoch-making’,  it  determines  ‘a  future’  ‘in  the  present’.  Here
“history”  signifies  a  ‘context’  of  events  and  ‘effects’,  which  draws  on
through ‘the past’, the ‘Present’, and the ‘future’. On this view, the past has
no special priority.

H. 379

 

Further, “history” signifies the totality of those entities which change ‘in
time’,  and  indeed  the  transformations  and  vicissitudes  of  men,  of  human
groupings and their ‘cultures’, as distinguished from Nature, which likewise
operates  ‘in  time’.  Here  what  one  has  in  view  is  not  so  much  a  kind  of
Being—historizing—as  it  is  that  realm  of  entities  which  one  distinguishes
from  Nature  by  having  regard  for  the  way  in  which  man’s  existence  is
essentially  determined  by  ‘spirit’  and  ‘culture’,  even  though  in  a  certain
manner Nature too belongs to “history” as thus understood.

Finally,  whatever  has  been  handed  down  to  us  is  as  such  held  to  be
‘historical’,  whether  it  is  something  which  we  know  historiologically,  or
something  that  has  been  taken  over  as  self-evident,  with  its  derivation
hidden.

If we take these four significations together, the upshot is that history is
that specific historizing of existent Dasein which comes to pass in time, so
that  the  historizing  which  is  ‘past’  in  our  Being-with-one-another,  and
which at the same time has been ‘handed down to us’ and is continuingly
effective, is regarded as “history” in the sense that gets emphasized.

The  four  significations  are  connected  in  that  they  relate  to  man  as  the
‘subject’  of  events.  How  is  the  historizing  character  of  such  events  to  be
defined?  Is  historizing  a  sequence  of  processes,  an  ever-changing
emergence and disappearance of events? In what way does this historizing
of history  belong  to  Dasein?  Is Dasein already factically ‘present-at-hand’
to begin with, so that on occasion it can get ‘into a history’? Does Dasein

intertwined  with  events  and
first  become  historical  by  getting 
circumstances?  Or  is  the  Being  of  Dasein  constituted  first  of  all  by
historizing, so that anything like circumstances, events, and vicissitudes is
ontologically possible only because Dasein is historical in its Being? Why
is it that the function of the past gets particularly stressed when the Dasein
which historizes ‘in time’ is characterized ‘temporally’?

If  history  belongs  to  Dasein’s  Being,  and  this  Being  is  based  on
temporality,  then  it  would  be  easy  to  begin  the  existential  analysis  of
historicality  with  those  characteristics  of  the  historical  which  obviously
have  a  temporal  meaning.  Therefore,  by  characterizing  more  precisely  the
remarkably  privileged  position  of  the  ‘past’  in  the  concept  of  history,  we
shall prepare the way for expounding the basic constitution of historicality.

H. 380

 

The  ‘antiquities’  preserved  in  museums  (household  gear,  for  example)
belong  to  a  ‘time  which  is  past’;  yet  they  are  still  present-at-hand  in  the
‘Present’. How far is such equipment historical, when it is not yet past? Is it
historical, let us say, only because it has become an object of historiological
interest, of antiquarian study or national lore? But such equipment can be a
historiological  object  only  because  it  is  in  itself  somehow  historical.  We
repeat the question: by what right do we call this entity “historical”, when it
is not yet past? Or do these ‘Things’ have ‘in themselves’ ‘something past’,
even though they are still present-at-hand today? Then are these, which are
present-at-hand,  still  what  they  were?  Manifestly  these  ‘Things’  have
altered. The gear has become fragile or worm-eaten ‘in the course of time’.
But that specific character of the past which makes it something historical,
does  not  lie  in  this  transience,(1)  which  continues  even  during  the  Being-
present-at-hand of the equipment in the museum. What, then, is past in this
equipment?  What  were  these  ‘Things’  which  today  they  are  no  longer?
They are still definite items of equipment for use; but they are out of use.
Suppose, however, that they were still in use today, like many a household
heirloom; would they then be not yet historical? All the same, whether they
are in use or out of use, they are no longer what they were. What is ‘past’?
Nothing  else  than  that  world  within  which  they  belonged  to  a  context  of
equipment and were encountered as ready-to-hand and used by a concernful
Dasein  who  was-in-the-world.  That  world  is  no  longer.  But  what  was

formerly within-the-world with respect to that world is still present-at-hand.
As equipment belonging to a world, that which is now still  present-at-hand
can belong nevertheless to the ‘past’. But what do we signify by saying of a
world that it is no longer? A world is only in the manner of existing Dasein,
which factically  i s  as Being-in-the-world.(2)
 

1. ‘Vergänglichkeit’. Cf. ‘vergehen’ (‘to pass away’) and ‘Vergangenheit’ (‘the past’).
2. ‘Welt ist nur in der Weise des existierenden Daseins, das als In-der-Welt-sein faktisch ist.’

H. 381

 

Thus the historical character of the antiquities that are still preserved is
grounded  in  the  ‘past’  of  that  Dasein  to  whose  world  they  belonged.  But
according to this, only ‘past’ Dasein would be historical, not Dasein ‘in the
present’. However, can Dasein be past at all, if we define ‘past’ as ‘now no
longer  either  present-at-hand  or  ready-to-hand’?  Manifestly,  Dasein  can
never be past, not because Dasein is non-transient, but because it essentially
can never be present-at-hand. Rather,  if  it is,  it exists.  A Dasein which no
longer  exists,  however,  is  not  past,  in  the  ontologically  strict  sense;  it  is
rather  “having-been-there”  [da-gewesen].  The  antiquities  which  are  still
present-at-hand have a character of ‘the past’ and of history by reason of the
fact  that  they  have  belonged  as  equipment  to  a  world  that  has  been—the
world  of  a  Dasein  that  has  been  there—and  that  they  have  been  derived
from  that  world.  This  Dasein  is  what  is  primarily  historical.  But  does
Dasein  first  become  historical  in  that  it  is  no  longer  there?  Or  is  it  not
historical precisely in so far as it factically exists? Is Dasein just something
that  “has  been”  in  the  sense  of  “having  been  there”,  or  has  it  been  as
something  futural  which  is  making  present—that  is  to  say,  in  the
temporalizing of its temporality?

From  this  provisional  analysis  of  equipment  which  belongs  to  history
and which is still present-at-hand though somehow ‘past’, it becomes plain
that  such  entities  are  historical  only  by  reason  of  their  belonging  to  the
world. But the world has a historical kind of Being because it makes up an
ontological  attribute  of  Dasein.  It  may  be  shown  further  that  when  one
designates a time as ‘the past’, the meaning of this is not unequivocal; but
‘the past’ is manifestly distinct from one’s having been, with which we have
become  acquainted  as  something  constitutive  for  the  ecstatical  unity  of

Dasein’s  temporality.  This,  however,  only  makes  the  enigma  ultimately
more acute; why is it that the historical is determined predominantly by the
‘past’,  or,  to  speak  more  appropriately,  by  the  character  of  having-been,
when that character is one that temporalizes itself equiprimordially with the
Present and the future?

We  contend  that  what  is  primarily  historical  is  Dasein.  That  which  is
secondarily historical,  however,  is  what  we  encounter  within-the-world—
not  only  equipment  ready-to-hand,  in  the  widest  sense,  but  also  the
environing Nature as  ‘the  very  soil  of  history.’  Entities  other  than  Dasein
which are historical by reason of belonging to the world, are what we call
‘world-historical’. It can be shown that the ordinary conception of ‘world-
history’  arises  precisely  from  our  orientation  to  what  is  thus  secondarily
historical. World-historical entities do not first get their historical character,
let us say, by reason of an historiological Objectification; they get it rather
as  those  entities which  they  are  in  themselves  when  they  are  encountered
within-the-world.

In analysing the historical character of equipment which is still present-
at-hand,  we  have  not  only  been  led  back  to  Dasein  as  that  which  is
primarily  historical;  but  at  the  same  time  we  have  been  made  to  doubt
whether  the  temporal  characterization  of  the  historical  in  general  may  be
oriented primarily to the Being-in-time of anything present-at-hand. Entities
do  not  become  ‘more  historical’  by  being  moved  off  into  a  past  which  is
always  farther  and  farther  away,  so  that  the  oldest  of  them  would  be  the
most authentically historical. On the other hand, if the ‘temporal’ distance
from  “now  and  today”  is  of  no  primary  constitutive  significance  for  the
historicality  of  entities  that  are  authentically  historical,  this  is  not  because
these  entities  are  not  ‘in  time’  and  are  timeless,  but  because  they  exist
temporally  in  so  primordial  a  manner  that  nothing  present-at-hand  ‘in
time’,  whether  passing  away  or  still  coming  along,  could  ever—by  its
ontological essence—be temporal in such a way.

H. 382

 

It  will  be  said  that  these  deliberations  have  been  rather  petty.  No  one
denies that at bottom human Dasein is the primary ‘subject’ of history; and
the  ordinary  conception  of  history,  which  we  have  cited,  says  so  plainly
enough. But with the thesis that ‘Dasein is historical’, one has in view not

just  the  ontical  Fact  that  in  man  we  are  presented  with  a  more  or  less
important ‘atom’ in the workings of world-history, and that he remains the
plaything  of  circumstances  and  events.  This  thesis  raises  the  problem:  to
what  extent  and  on  the  basis  of  what  ontological  conditions,  does
historicality belong, as an essential constitutive state, to the subjectivity of
the ‘historical’ subject?

74. The Basic Constitution of Historicality

Dasein factically has its ‘history’, and it can have something of the sort
because the Being of this entity is constituted by historicality. We must now
justify  this  thesis,  with  the  aim  of  expounding  the  ontological problem  of
history as an existential one. The Being of Dasein has been defined as care.
Care is grounded in temporality. Within the range of temporality, therefore,
the  kind  of  historizing  which  gives  existence  its  definitely  historical
character,  must  be  sought.  Thus  the  Interpretation  of  Dasein’s  historicality
will prove to be, at bottom, just a more concrete working out of temporality.
We  first  revealed  temporality  with  regard  to  that  way  of  existing
authentically which we characterized as anticipatory resoluteness. How far
does this imply an authentic historizing of Dasein?

 

 

H. 383

We  have  defined  “resoluteness”  as  a  projecting  of  oneself  upon  one’s
own Being-guilty—a projecting which is reticent and ready for anxiety.(iv)
Resoluteness  gains  its  authenticity  as  anticipatory resoluteness.(v)  In  this,
Dasein  understands  itself  with  regard  to  its  potentiality-for-Being,  and  it
does  so  in  such  a  manner  that  it  will  go  right  under  the  eyes  of  Death  in
order thus to take over in its thrownness that entity which it is itself, and to
take  it  over  wholly.  The  resolute  taking  over  of  one’s  factical  ‘there’,
signifies, at the same time, that the Situation is one which has been resolved
upon.  In  the  existential  analysis  we  cannot,  in  principle,  discuss  what
Dasein factically resolves in any particular case. Our investigation excludes
even  the  existential  projection  of  the  factical  possibilities  of  existence.
Nevertheless,  we  must  ask  whence,  in  general,  Dasein  can  draw  those
possibilities  upon  which  it  factically  projects  itself.  One’s  anticipatory

projection  of  oneself  on  that  possibility  of  existence  which  is  not  to  be
outstripped—on  death—guarantees  only  the  totality  and  authenticity  of
one’s  resoluteness.  But  those  possibilities  of  existence  which  have  been
factically disclosed are not to be gathered from death. And this is still less
the case when one’s anticipation of this possibility does not signify that one
is  speculating  about  it,  but  signifies  precisely  that  one  is  coming  back  to
one’s  factical  “there”.  Will  taking  over  the  thrownness  of  the  Self  into  its
world perhaps disclose a horizon from which existence snatches its factical
possibilities away?(1) Have we not said in addition that Dasein never comes
back  behind  its  thrownness?(vi)  Before  we  decide  too  quickly  whether
Dasein draws it authentic possibilities of existence from thrownness or not,
we must assure ourselves that we have a full conception of thrownness as a
basic attribute of care.
 

iv. Cf. Section 60, H. 295 ff.
v. Cf. Section 62, H. 305 ff.
vi. Cf. H. 284.

1.          ‘Soll  etwa  die  Übernahme  der  Geworfenheit  des  Selbst  in  seine  Welt  einen  Horizont

erschliessen, dem die Existenz ihre faktischen Möglichkeiten entreisst?’

As  thrown,  Dasein  has  indeed  been  delivered  over  to  itself  and  to  its
potentiality-for-Being,  but  as  Being-in-the-world.  As  thrown,  it  has  been
submitted to a ‘world’, and exists factically with Others. Proximally and for
the most part the Self is lost in the “they”. It understands itself in terms of
those possibilities of existence which ‘circulate’ in the ‘average’ public way
of  interpreting  Dasein  today.  These  possibilities  have  mostly  been  made
unrecognizable by ambiguity; yet they are well known to us. The authentic
existentiell  understanding  is  so  far  from  extricating  itself  from  the  way  of
interpreting  Dasein  which  has  come  down  to  us,  that  in  each  case  it  is  in
terms  of  this  interpretation,  against  it,  and  yet  again  for  it,  that  any
possibility one has chosen is seized upon in one’s resolution.

H. 384

The resoluteness in which Dasein comes back to itself, discloses current
factical possibilities of authentic existing, and discloses them in terms of the
heritage  which  that  resoluteness,  as  thrown,  takes  over.  In  one’s  coming

 

 

back  resolutely  to  one’s  thrownness,  there  is  hidden  a  handing  down  to
oneself of the possibilities that have come down to one, but not necessarily
as having  thus  come  down.(1)  If  everything  ‘good’  is  a  heritage,  and  the
character of ‘goodness’ lies in making authentic existence possible, then the
handing  down  of  a  heritage  constitutes  itself  in  resoluteness.  The  more
authentically  Dasein resolves—and  this means that in  anticipating  death it
understands  itself  unambiguously  in  terms  of  its  ownmost  distinctive
possibility—the more unequivocally does it choose and find the possibility
of  its  existence,  and  the  less  does  it  do  so  by  accident.  Only  by  the
anticipation of death is every accidental and ‘provisional’ possibility driven
out.  Only  Being-free  for death,  gives  Dasein  its  goal  outright  and  pushes
existence  into  its  finitude.  Once  one  has  grasped  the  finitude  of  one’s
existence, it snatches one back from the endless multiplicity of possibilities
which  offer  themselves  as  closest  to  one—those  of  comfortableness,
shirking, and taking things lightly—and brings Dasein into the simplicity of
its  fate  [Schicksals].  This  is  how  we  designate  Dasein’s  primordial
historizing, which lies in authentic resoluteness and in which Dasein hands
itself down to  itself,  free  for  death,  in  a  possibility  which  it  has  inherited
and yet has chosen.
 

1.  ‘Die  Entschlossenheit,  in  der  das  Dasein  auf  sich  selbst  zurückkommt,  erschliesst  die
jeweiligen  faktischen  Möglichkeiten  eigentlichen  Existierens  aus  dem  Erbe,  das  sie  als  geworfene
übernimmt.  Das  entschlossene  Zurückkommen  auf  die  Geworfenheit  birgt  ein  Sichüberliefern
überkommener Möglichkeiten in sich, obzwar nicht notwendig als überkommener.’ The grammatical
structure of both sentences is ambiguous. Notice also the counterpoint of the verbs ‘zurückkommen’,
‘überkommen’, ‘überliefern’, ‘übernehmen,’ which cannot be reproduced in translation.

Dasein can be reached by the blows of fate only because in the depths of
its Being Dasein is fate in the sense we have described. Existing fatefully in
the  resoluteness  which  hands  itself  down,  Dasein  has  been  disclosed  as
Being-in-the-world  both  for  the  ‘fortunate’  circumstances which ‘come its
way’  and  for  the  cruelty  of  accidents.  Fate  does  not  first  arise  from  the
clashing  together  of events and circumstances. Even one who is  irresolute
gets driven about by these—more so than one who has chosen; and yet he
can ‘have’ no fate.(1)

If Dasein, by anticipation, lets death become powerful in itself, then, as
free  for  death,  Dasein  understands  itself  in  its  own  superior  power,  the
power  of  its  finite  freedom,  so  that  in  this  freedom,  which  ‘is’  only  in  its
having chosen to make such a choice, it can take over the powerlessness of

abandonment  to  its  having  done  so,  and  can  thus  come  to  have  a  clear
vision  for  the  accidents  of  the  Situation  that  has  been  disclosed.(2)  But  if
fateful  Dasein,  as  Being-in-the-world,  exists  essentially  in  Being-with
Others,  its  historizing  is  a  co-historizing  and  is  determinative  for  it  as
destiny  [Geschick].  This  is  how  we  designate  the  historizing  of  the
community,  of  a  people.  Destiny  is  not  something  that  puts  itself  together
out  of  individual  fates,  any  more  than  Being-with-one-another  can  be
conceived as the occurring together of several Subjects.(vii) Our fates have
already been guided in advance, in our Being with one another in the same
world  and 
in
communicating  and  in  struggling  does  the  power  of  destiny  become  free.
Dasein’s  fateful  destiny  in  and  with  its  ‘generation’(viii)  goes  to  make  up
the full authentic historizing of Dasein.
 

in  our  resoluteness  for  definite  possibilities.  Only 

vii. Cf. Section 26, H. 117 ff.
viii. On the concept of the ‘generation’, cf. Wilhelm Dilthey, ‘Über das Studium der Geschichte
der Wissenschaften vom Menschen, der Gesellschaft und dem Staat’ (1875). Gesammelte Schriften,
vol. V (1924), pp. 36-41.
 

1.  This  statement  may  well  puzzle  the  English-speaking  reader,  who  would  perhaps  be  less
troubled if he were to read that the irresolute man can have no ‘destiny’. As we shall see in the next
paragraph,  Heidegger  has  chosen  to  differentiate  sharply  between  the  words  ‘Schicksal’  and
‘Geschick’, which are ordinarily synonyms. Thus ‘Schicksal’ (our ‘fate’) might be described as the
‘destiny’  of  the  resolute  individual;  ‘Geschick’  (our  ‘destiny’)  is  rather  the  ‘destiny’  of  a  larger
group,  or  of  Dasein  as  a  member  of  such  a  group.  This  usage  of  ‘Geschick’  is  probably  to  be
distinguished  from  that  which  we  have  met  on  H.  16,  19,  and  perhaps  even  379,  where  we  have
preferred  to  translate  it  by  ‘vicissitude’.  The  suggestion  of  an  etymological  connection  between
‘Schicksal’  and  ‘Geschick’  on  the  one  hand  and  ‘Geschichte’  (our  ‘history’)  and  ‘Geschehen’  (our
‘historizing’) on the other, which is exploited in the next paragraph, is of course lost in translation.

2. ‘Wenn das Dasein vorlaufend den Tod in sich mächtig werden lässt, versteht es sich, frei für
ihn,  in  der  eigenen  Übermacht  seiner  endlichen  Freiheit,  um  in  dieser,  die  je  nur  “ist”  im
Gewählthaben der Wahl, die Ohnmacht der Überlassenheit  an  es  selbst  zu  übernehmen  und  für  die
Zufälle  der  erschlossenen  Situation  hellsichtig  zu  werden.’  It  should  perhaps  be  pointed  out  that
‘Ohnmacht’  can  also  mean  a  ‘faint’  or  a  ‘swoon’,  and  that  ‘Hellsichtigkeit’  is  the  regular  term  for
‘clairvoyance’. Thus the German reader might easily read into this passage a suggestion of the seer’s
mystical trance.

H. 385

 

Fate  is  that powerless superior power  which puts  itself in  readiness  for
adversities—the power of projecting oneself upon one’s own Being-guilty,
and of doing so reticently, with readiness for anxiety. As such, fate requires

as the ontological condition for its possibility, the state of Being of care—
that  is  to  say,  temporality.  Only  if  death,  guilt,  conscience,  freedom,  and
finitude reside together equiprimordially in the Being of an entity as they do
in care, can that entity exist in the mode of fate; that is to say, only then can
it be historical in the very depths of its existence.

Only an entity which, in its Being, is essentially futural so that it is free
for its death and can let itself be thrown back upon its factical “there” by
shattering  itself  against  death—that  is  to  say,  only  an  entity  which,  as
futural, is equiprimordially in the process of having-been, can, by handing
down to itself the possibility it has inherited, take over its own thrownness
and be in the moment of vision for  ‘its  time’.  Only authentic temporality
which is at the same time finite, makes possible something like fate—that is
to say, authentic historicality.

H. 386

 

It  is  not  necessary  that  in  resoluteness  one  should  explicitly  know  the
origin of the possibilities upon which that resoluteness projects itself. It is
rather in Dasein’s temporality, and there only, that there lies any possibility
that the existentiell potentiality-for-Being upon which it projects itself can
be gleaned explicitly from  the  way  in  which Dasein has been traditionally
understood.  The  resoluteness  which  comes  back  to  itself  and  hands  itself
down,  then  becomes  the  repetition  of  a  possibility  of  existence  that  has
come  down  to  us.  Repeating  is  handing  down  explicitly—that  is  to  say,
going  back  into  the  possibilities  of  the  Dasein  that  has-been-there.(1)  The
authentic  repetition  of  a  possibility  of  existence  that  has  been—the
possibility  that  Dasein  may  choose  its  hero—is  grounded  existentially  in
anticipatory resoluteness; for it is in resoluteness that one first chooses the
choice  which  makes  one  free  for  the  struggle  of  loyally  following  in  the
footsteps  of  that  which  can  be  repeated.  But  when  one  has,  by  repetition,
handed  down  to  oneself  a  possibility  that  has  been,  the  Dasein  that  has-
been-there  is  not  disclosed  in  order  to  be  actualized  over  again.  The
repeating  of  that  which  is  possible  does  not  bring  again  [Wiederbringen]
something  that  is  ‘past’,  nor  does  it  bind  the  ‘Present’  back  to  that  which
has  already  been  ‘outstripped’.  Arising,  as  it  does,  from  a  resolute
projection  of  oneself,  repetition  does  not  let  itself  be  persuaded  of

something by what is ‘past’, just in order that this, as something which was
formerly actual, may recur.
 

1.  ‘Die  Wiederholung  ist  die  ausdrückliche  Überlieferung,  das  heisst,  der  Rückgang  in
Möglichkeiten  des  dagewesenen  Daseins’.  (In  the  earlier  editions  the  article  ‘Die’,  as  well  as  the
words now italicized, appears in spaced type.)

While  we  usually  translate  ‘wiederholen’  as  ‘repeat’,  this  English  word  is  hardly  adequate  to
express  Heidegger’s  meaning.  Etymologically,  ‘wiederholen’  means  ‘to  fetch  again’;  in  modern
German  usage,  however,  this  is  expressed  by  the  cognate  separable  verb  ‘wieder...  holen’,  while
‘wiederholen’  means  simply  ‘to  repeat’  or  ‘do  over  again’.  Heidegger  departs  from  both  these
meanings,  as  he  is  careful  to  point  out.  For  him,  ‘wiederholen’  does  not  mean  either  a  mere
mechanical repetition or an attempt to reconstitute the physical past; it means rather an attempt to go
back  to  the  past  and  retrieve  former  possibilities,  which  are  thus  ‘explicitly  handed  down’  or
‘transmitted’.

Rather, the repetition makes a reciprocative rejoinder to  the  possibility
of that existence which has-been-there. But when such a rejoinder is made
to this possibility in a resolution, it is made in a moment of vision; and as
such  it  is  at  the  same  time  a  disavowal  of  that  which  in  the  “today”,  is
working itself out as the ‘past’.(1) Repetition does not abandon itself to that
which is past, nor does it aim at progress. In the moment of vision authentic
existence is indifferent to both these alternatives.
 

1.  ‘Die  Wiederholung  lässt  sich,  einem  entschlossenen  Sichentwerfen  entspringend,  nicht  vom
“Vergangenen”  überreden,  um  es  als  das  vormals  Wirkliche  nur  wiederkehren  zu  lassen.  Die
Wiederholung  erwidert  vielmehr  die  Möglichkeit  der  dagewesenen  Existenz.  Die  Erwiderung  der
Möglichkeit im Entschluss ist aber zugleich als augenblickliche der Widerruf  dessen,  was  in  Heute
sich als “Vergangenheit” auswirkt.’ The idea seems to be that in resolute repetition one is having, as
it were, a conversation with the past, in which the past proposes certain possibilities for adoption, but
in  which  one  makes  a  rejoinder  to  this  proposal  by  ‘reciprocating’  with  the  proposal  of  other
possibilities  as  a  sort  of  rebuke  to  the  past,  which  one  now  disavows.  (The  punning  treatment  of
‘wieder’ and ‘wider’ is presumably intentional.)

We  characterize  repetition  as  a  mode  of  that  resoluteness  which  hands
itself down—the mode by which Dasein exists explicitly as fate. But if fate
constitutes  the  primordial  historicality  of  Dasein,  then  history  has  its
essential  importance  neither  in  what  is  past  nor  in  the  “today”  and  its
‘connection’ with what is past, but in that authentic historizing of existence
which  arises  from  Dasein’s  future.  As  a  way  of  Being  for  Dasein,  history
has  its  roots  so  essentially  in  the  future  that  death,  as  that  possibility  of
Dasein which we have already characterized, throws anticipatory existence
back  upon  its  factical  thrownness,  and  so  for  the  first  time  imparts  to

having-been  its  peculiarly  privileged  position  in  the  historical.  Authentic
Being-towards-death—that  is  to  say,  the  finitude  of  temporality—is  the
hidden  basis  of  Dasein’s  historicality.  Dasein  does  not  first  become
historical  in  repetition;  but  because  it  is  historical  as  temporal,  it  can  take
itself  over  in  its  history  by  repeating.  For  this,  no  historiology  is  as  yet
needed.

Resoluteness  implies  handing  oneself  down  by  anticipation  to  the
“there” of the moment of vision; and this handing down we call “fate”. This
is also the ground for destiny, by which we understand Dasein’s historizing
in  Being-with  Others.  In  repetition,  fateful  destiny  can  be  disclosed
explicitly  as  bound  up  with  the  heritage  which  has  come  down  to  us.  By
repetition,  Dasein  first  has  its  own  history  made  manifest.  Historizing  is
itself  grounded  existentially  in  the  fact  that  Dasein,  as  temporal,  is  open
ecstatically;  so  too  is  the  disclosedness  which  belongs  to  historizing,  or
rather so too is the way in which we make this disclosedness our own.

H. 387

 

That  which  we  have  hitherto  been  characterizing  as  “historicality”  to
conform with the kind of historizing which lies in anticipatory resoluteness,
the
we  now  designate  as  Dasein’s  “authentic  historicality”.  From 
phenomena of handing down and repeating, which are rooted in the future,
it  has  become  plain  why  the  historizing  of  authentic  history  lies
preponderantly  in  having  been.  But  it  remains  all  the  more  enigmatic  in
what way this historizing, as fate, is to constitute the whole ‘connectedness’
of Dasein from its birth to its death. How can recourse to resoluteness bring
us  any  enlightenment?  Is  not  each  resolution  just  one  more  single
‘Experience’  in  the  sequence  of  the  whole  connectedness  of  our
Experiences?  Is  the  ‘connectedness’  of  authentic  historizing  to  consist,  let
us  say,  of  an  uninterrupted  sequence  of  resolutions?  Why  is  it  that  the
question of how the ‘connectedness of life’ is Constituted finds no adequate
and  satisfying  answer?  Is  not  our  investigation  overhasty?  Does  it  not,  in
the  end,  hang  too  much  on  the  answer,  without  first  having  tested  the
legitimacy  of  the  question?  Nothing  is  so  plain  from  the  course  of  the
existential analytic so far, as the Fact that the ontology of Dasein is always
falling back upon  the  allurements of the  way  in  which Being  is  ordinarily
understood. The only way of encountering this fact methodologically is by

studying  the  source  of  the  question  of  how  Dasein’s  connectedness  is
Constituted,  no  matter  how  ‘obvious’  this  question  may  be,  and  by
determining within what ontological horizon it moves.

If  historicality  belongs  to  the  Being  of  Dasein,  then  even  inauthentic
existing  must  be  historical.  What  if  it  is  Dasein’s  inauthentic  historicality
that  has  directed  our  questioning  to  the  ‘connectedness  of  life’  and  has
blocked  off  our  access  to  authentic  historicality  and  its  own  peculiar
‘connectedness’?  However  this  may  be  treated,  we  cannot  do  without  a
study  of  Dasein’s  inauthentic  historicality  if  our  exposition  of  the
ontological problem of history is to be adequate and complete.

75. Dasein’s Historicality, and World-history

 

 

H. 388

Proximally  and  for  the  most  part,  Dasein  understands  itself  in  terms  of
that  which  it  encounters  in  the  environment  and  that  with  which  it  is
circumspectively  concerned.  This  understanding  is  not  just  a  bare  taking
cognizance  of  itself,  such  as  accompanies  all  Dasein’s  ways  of  behaving.
Understanding  signifies  one’s  projecting  oneself  upon  one’s  current
possibility of Being-in-the-world; that is to say, it signifies existing as this
possibility.  Thus  understanding,  as  common  sense,  constitutes  even  the
inauthentic  existence  of  the  “they”.  When  we  are  with  one  another  in
public, our everyday concern does not encounter just equipment and work;
it  likewise  encounters  what  is  ‘given’  along  with  these:  ‘affairs’,
undertakings,  incidents,  mishaps.  The  ‘world’  belongs  to  everyday  trade
and 
traffic  as  the  soil  from  which  they  grow  and  the  arena  where  they  are
displayed.  When  we  are  with  one  another  in  public,  the  Others  are
encountered  in  activity  of  such  a  kind  that  one  is  ‘in  the  swim’  with  it
‘oneself’. One is acquainted with it, discusses it, encourages it, combats it,
retains  it,  and  forgets  it,  but  one  always  does  so  primarily  with  regard  to
what  is  getting  done  and  what  is  ‘going  to  come  of  it’  [was...
“herausspringt”]. We compute the progress which the individual Dasein has
made—his stoppages, readjustments, and ‘output’; and we do so proximally
in  terms  of  that  with  which  he  is  concerned—its  course,  its  status,  its

is  understood 

in  which  Dasein 

changes,  its  availability.  No  matter  how  trivial  it  may  be  to  allude  to  the
way 
in  everyday  common  sense,
ontologically  this  understanding  is  by  no  means  transparent.  But  in  that
case, why should not Dasein’s ‘connectedness’ be defined in terms of what
it is concerned with, and what it ‘Experiences’? Do not equipment and work
and every thing which Dasein dwells alongside, belong to ‘history’ too? If
not, is the historizing of history just the isolated running-off of ‘streams of
Experience’ in individual subjects?

H. 389

 

Indeed history is neither the connectedness of motions in the alterations
of  Objects,  nor  a  free-floating  sequence  of  Experiences  which  ‘subjects’
have had. Does the historizing of history then pertain to the way subject and
Object  are  ‘linked  together’?  Even  if  one  assigns  [zuweist]  historizing  to
the subject-Object relation, we then have to ask what kind of Being belongs
to  this  linkage  as  such,  if  this  is  what  basically  ‘historizes’.  The  thesis  of
Dasein’s  historicality  does  not  say  that  the  worldless  subject  is  historical,
but that what is historical is the entity that exists as Being-in-the-world. The
historizing  of  history  is  the  historizing  of  Being-in-the-world.  Dasein’s
historicality is essentially the historicality of the world, which, on the basis
of  ecstatico-horizontal  temporality,  belongs  to  the  temporalizing  of  that
temporality. In so far as Dasein exists factically, it already encounters that
which  has  been  discovered  within-the-world.  With  the  existence  of
historical Being-in-the-world, what is ready-to-hand and what is present-at-
hand have already, in every case, been incorporated into the history of the
world.  Equipment  and  work—for  instance,  books—have  their  fates;
buildings and institutions have their history. And even Nature is historical.
It is not historical, to be sure, in so far as we speak of ‘natural history’;(ix)
but Nature is historical as a countryside, as an area that has been colonized
or exploited, as a battlefield, or as the site of a cult. These entities within-
the-world  are  historical  as  such,  and  their  history  does  not  signify
something  ‘external’  which  merely  accompanies  the  ‘inner’  history  of  the
‘soul’.  We  call  such  entities  “the  world-historical”.  Here  we  must  notice
that the expression ‘world-history’ which we have chosen and which is here
understood  ontologically,  has  a  double  signification.  The  expression
signifies, for one thing, the historizing of the world in its essential existent

unity with Dasein. At the same time, we have here in view the ‘historizing’
within-the-world of what is ready-to-hand and present-at-hand, in so far as
entities  within-the-world  are,  in  every  case,  discovered  with  the  factically
existent world. The historical world is factical only as the world of entities
within-the-world. That which ‘happens’ with equipment and work as such
has its own character of movement, and this character has been completely
obscure  up  till  now.  When,  for  instance,  a  ring  gets  ‘handed  over’  to
someone  and  ‘worn’,  this  is  a  kind  of  Being  in  which  it  does  not  simply
suffer  changes  of  location.  The  movement  of  historizing  in  which
something ‘happens to something’ is not to be grasped in terms of motion
as  change  of  location.  This  holds  for  all  world-historical  ‘processes’  and
events, and even, in a certain manner, for ‘natural catastrophes’. Quite apart
from  the  fact  that  if  we  were  to  follow  up  the  problem  of  the  ontological
structure  of  world-historical  historizing,  we  would  necessarily  be
transgressing the limits of our theme, we can refrain from this all the more
because  the  very  aim  of  this  exposition  is  to  lead  us  face  to  face  with  the
ontological enigma of the movement of historizing in general.
 

ix.  On  the  question  of  how  ‘natural  happening’  is  to  be  distinguished  ontologically  from  the
movement  of  history,  cf.  the  studies  of  F.  Gottl,  which  for  a  long  time  have  not  been  sufficiently
appreciated: Die Grenzen der Geschichte (1904).
 

We need only delimit that phenomenal range which we necessarily must
also have in view ontologically when we talk of Dasein’s historicality. The
transcendence  of  the  world  has  a  temporal  foundation;  and  by  reason  of
this, the world-historical is, in every case, already ‘Objectively’ there in the
historizing  of  existing  Being-in-the-world,  without  being  grasped
historiologically. And because factical Dasein, in falling, is absorbed in that
with which it concerns itself, it understands its history world-historically in
the first instance. And because, further, the ordinary understanding of Being
understands ‘Being’ as presence-at-hand without further differentiation, the
Being of the world-historical is experienced and interpreted in the sense of
something  present-at-hand  which  comes  along,  has  presence,  and  then
disappears. And finally, because the meaning of Being in general is held to
be something simply self-evident, the question about the kind of Being of
the  world-historical  and  about  the  movement  of  historizing  in  general  has
‘really’ just the barren circumstantiality of a verbal sophistry.

H. 390

 

Everyday Dasein has been dispersed into the many kinds of things which
daily  ‘come  to  pass’.  The  opportunities  and  circumstances  which  concern
keeps  ‘tactically’  awaiting  in  advance,  have  ‘fate’  as  their  outcome.  In
terms  of that with  which inauthentically existing Dasein concerns itself, it
first computes its history. In so doing, it is driven about by its ‘affairs’. So if
it  wants  to  come  to  itself,  it  must  first  pull  itself  together(1)  from  the
dispersion  and  disconnectedness  of  the  very  things  that  have  ‘come  to
pass’; and because of this, it is  only  then  that there at  last  arises from the
horizon of the understanding which belongs to inauthentic historicality, the
question of how one is to establish a ‘connectedness’ of Dasein if one does
so in the sense of ‘Experiences’ of a subject—Experiences which are ‘also’
present-at-hand. The possibility that this horizon for the question should be
the dominant one is grounded in the irresoluteness which goes to make up
the essence of the Self’s in-constancy.
 

1. ‘zusammenholen’. The older editions have ‘z u s a m m e n holen’.

the  question  of 

We  have  thus  pointed  out  the  source  of 

the
‘connectedness’ of Dasein in the sense of the unity with which Experiences
are linked together between birth and death. At the same time, the origin of
this  question  betrays  that  it  is  an  inappropriate  one  if  we  are  aiming  at  a
primordial  existential  Interpretation  of  Dasein’s  totality  of  historizing.  On
the other hand, despite the predominance of this ‘natural’ horizon for such
questions, it becomes explicable why Dasein’s authentic historicality—fate
and  repetition—looks  as  if  it,  least  of  all,  could  supply  the  phenomenal
basis for bringing into the shape of an ontologically grounded problem what
is at bottom intended in the question of the ‘connectedness’ of life.

H. 391

 

This  question  does  not  ask  how  Dasein  gains  such  a  unity  of
connectedness that the sequence of ‘Experiences’ which has ensued and is
still ensuing can subsequently be linked together; it asks rather in which of
its own kinds of Being Dasein loses itself in such a manner(1) that it must,
as  it  were,  only  subsequently  pull  itself  together  out  of  its  dispersal,  and

think  up  for  itself  a  unity  in  which  that  “together”  is  embraced.  Our
lostness in the “they” and in the world-historical has earlier been revealed
as  a  fleeing  in  the  face  of  death.  Such  fleeing  makes  manifest  that  Being-
towards-death  is  a  basic  attribute  of  care.  Anticipatory  resoluteness  brings
this  Being-towards-death  into  authentic  existence.  The  historizing  of  this
resoluteness,  however,  is  the  repetition  of  the  heritage  of  possibilities  by
handing these down to oneself in anticipation; and we have Interpreted this
historizing  as  authentic  historicality.  Is  perhaps  the  whole  of  existence
stretched  along  in  this  historicality  in  a  way  which  is  primordial  and  not
lost,  and  which  has  no  need  of  connectedness?  The  Self’s  resoluteness
against  the  inconstancy  of  distraction,  is  in  itself  a  steadiness  which  has
been  stretched  along—the  steadiness  with  which  Dasein  as  fate
‘incorporates’  into  its  existence  birth  and  death  and  their  ‘between’,  and
holds  them  as  thus  ‘incorporated’,  so  that  in  such  constancy  Dasein  is
indeed  in  a  moment  of  vision  for  what  is  world-historical  in  its  current
Situation.(2)
 

1. ‘...verliert es sich so...’ The older editions have ‘...verliert es sich nicht so...’
2. ‘Die Entschlossenheit des Selbst gegen die Unständigkeit der Zerstreuung ist in sich selbst die
erstreckte  Stätigkeit,  in  der  das  Dasein  als  Schicksal  Geburt  und  Tod  in  ihr  “Zwischen”  in  seine
Existenz “einbezogen” hält, so zwar, dass es in solcher Ständigkeit augenblicklich ist für das Welt-
geschichtliche  seiner  jeweiligen  Situation.’  The  noun  ‘Stätigkeit’,  which  we  here  translate  as
‘steadiness’,  may  mean  either  ‘continuity’  or  ‘refractoriness’.  Heidegger  may  have  both  senses  in
mind. Cf. our note 3, H. 423 below.

In  the  fateful  repetition  of  possibilities  that  have  been,  Dasein  brings
itself  back  ‘immediately’—that  is  to  say,  in  a  way  that  is  temporally
ecstatical—to what already has been before it. But when its heritage is thus
handed  down  to  itself,  its  ‘birth’  is caught  up  into  its  existence in  coming
back  from  the  possibility  of  death  (the  possibility  which  is  not  to  be
outstripped), if only so that this existence may accept the thrownness of its
own “there” in a way which is more free from Illusion.(1)
 

1. ‘Mit diesem Sichüberliefern des Erbes aber ist dann die “Geburt” im Zurückkommen aus der
unüberholbaren  Möglichkeit  des  Todes  in  die  Existenz  eingeholt,  damit  diese  freilich  nur  die
Geworfenheit  des  eigenen  Da  illusionsfreier  hinnehme.’  Here  as  in  H.  307  and  perhaps  in  H.  302,
Heidegger seems to be exploiting the double meaning of ‘einholen’ as ‘to bring in’ and ‘to catch up
with’. Dasein ‘brings’ its birth ‘into’ its existence by accepting its heritage of possibilities, and in this
way it ‘catches up with it’. Thus while death cannot be outstripped (‘überholt’), birth can at least be
‘caught up with’ (‘eingeholt’).

Resoluteness  constitutes  the  loyalty  of  existence  to  its  own  Self.  As
resoluteness  which  is  ready  for  anxiety, this  loyalty  is  at  the  same  time  a
possible way of revering the sole authority which a free existing can have—
of revering the repeatable possibilities of existence. Resoluteness would be
misunderstood ontologically if one were to suppose that it would be actual
as ‘Experience’ only as long as the ‘act’ of resolving ‘lasts’. In resoluteness
lies  the  existentiell  constancy  which,  by  its  very  essence,  has  already
anticipated [vorweggenommen] every possible moment of vision that may
arise  from  it.  As  fate,  resoluteness  is  freedom  to  give  up  some  definite
resolution,  and  to  give  it  up  in  accordance  with  the  demands  of  some
possible  Situation  or  other.  The  steadiness  of  existence  is  not  interrupted
thereby but confirmed in the moment of vision. This steadiness is not first
formed either through or by the adjoining of ‘moments’ one to another; but
these arise from the temporality of that repetition which is futurally in the
process-of-having-been—a  temporality  which  has  already  been  stretched
along.

In inauthentic historicality, on the other hand, the way in which fate has
been primordially stretched along has been hidden. With the inconstancy of
the  they-self  Dasein  makes  present  its  ‘today’.  In  awaiting  the  next  new
thing, it has already forgotten the old one. The “they” evades choice. Blind
for  possibilities,  it  cannot  repeat  what  has  been,  but  only  retains  and
receives the ‘actual’ that is left over, the world-historical that has been, the
leavings, and the information about them that is present-at-hand. Lost in the
making  present  of  the  “today”,  it  understands  the  ‘past’  in  terms  of  the
‘Present’.  On  the  other  hand,  the  temporality  of  authentic  historicality,  as
the moment of vision of anticipatory repetition, deprives the “today” of its
character  as  present,(1)  and  weans  one  from  the  conventionalities  of  the
“they”.  When,  however,  one’s  existence  is  inauthentically  historical,  it  is
loaded down with the legacy of a ‘past’ which has become unrecognizable,
and it seeks the modern. But when historicality is authentic, it understands
history as the ‘recurrence’ of the possible, and knows that a possibility will
recur  only  if  existence  is  open  for  it  fatefully,  in  a  moment  of  vision,  in
resolute repetition.

H. 392

 

The  existential  Interpretation  of  Dasein’s  historicality  is  constantly
getting eclipsed unawares. The obscurities are all the harder to dispel when
we  have  not  disentangled  the  possible  dimensions  of  the  appropriate
inquiry, and when everything is haunted by the enigma of Being, and, as has
now been made plain, by that of motion.(2) Nevertheless, we may venture a
projection of the ontological genesis of historiology as a science in terms of
Dasein’s  historicality.  This  projection  will  serve  to  prepare  us  for  the
clarification  of 
the  history  of  philosophy
historiologically—a  clarification  which  is  to  be  accomplished  in  what
follows.(x)
 

task  of  destroying 

the 

 
x. Cf. Section 6, H. 19 ff.

1. ‘...eine Entgegenwärtigung des Heute...’
2. ‘...und in allem das Rätsel des Seins und, wie jetzt deutlich wurde, der Bewegung sein Wesen

treibt.’

76. The Existential Source of Historiology in Dasein’s Historicality.

We need not discuss the Fact that historiology, like any science, is, as a
kind  of  Being  of  Dasein,  factically  ‘dependent’  at  any  time  on  the
‘prevailing world-view’. Beyond this, we must inquire into the ontological
possibility of how the sciences have their source in Dasein’s state of Being.
This source is still not very transparent. In the context which lies before us,
our  analysis  will  acquaint  us  in  outline  with  the  existential  source  of
historiology  only  to  the  extent  of  bringing  still  more  plainly  to  light  the
historicality  of  Dasein  and  the  fact  that  this  historicality  is  rooted  in
temporality.

If Dasein’s Being is in principle historical, then every factical science is
always  manifestly  in  the  grip  of  this  historizing.  But  historiology  still  has
Dasein’s historicality as its presupposition in its own quite special way.

H. 393

This  can  be  made  plain,  in  the  first  instance,  by  the  suggestion  that
historiology,  as  the  science  of  Dasein’s  history,  must  ‘presuppose’  as  its

 

 

 

itself.  Whether 

in  which  Dasein  comports 

possible  ‘Object’  the  entity  which  is  primordially  historical.  But  history
must  not  only  be,  in  order  that  a  historiological  object  may  become
accessible;  and  historiological  cognition  is  not  only  historical,  as  a
the
historizing  way 
historiological  disclosure  of  history  is  factically  accomplished  or  not,  its
ontological structure is such that in itself this disclosure has its roots in the
historicality  of  Dasein. This  is  the  connection  we  have  in  view  when  we
talk of Dasein’s historicality as the existential source of historiology. To cast
light  upon  this  connection  signifies  methodologically  that  the  idea  of
historiology  must  be  projected  ontologically 
terms  of  Dasein’s
historicality.  The  issue  here  is  not  one  of  ‘abstracting’  the  concept  of
historiology  from  the  way  something  is  factically  done  in  the  sciences
today,  nor  is  it  one  of  assimilating  it  to  anything  of  this  sort.  For  what
guarantee do we have in principle that such a factical procedure will indeed
be  properly  representative  of  historiology  in  its  primordial  and  authentic
possibilities? And even if this should turn out to be the case—we shall hold
back from any decision about this—then the concept could be ‘discovered’
in  the  Fact  only  by  using  the  clue  provided  by  the  idea  of  historiology  as
one  which  we  have  already  understood.  On  the  other  hand,  the  existential
idea  of  historiology  is  not  given  a  higher  justification  by  having  the
historian affirm that his factical behaviour is in agreement with it. Nor does
the idea become ‘false’ if he disputes any such agreement.

in 

is 

thematizing.  That  which 

The  idea  of  historiology  as  a  science  implies  that  the  disclosure  of
historical entities is what it has seized upon as its own task. Every science is
constituted  primarily  by 
familiar
prescientifically  in  Dasein  as  disclosed  Being-in-the-world,  gets  projected
upon  the  Being  which  is  specific  to  it.  With  this  projection,  the  realm  of
entities  is  bounded  off.  The  ways  of  access  to  them  get  ‘managed’
methodologically,  and  the  conceptual  structure  for  interpreting  them  is
outlined.  If  we  may  postpone  the  question  of  whether  a  ‘history  of  the
Present’  is  possible,  and  assign  [zuweisen]  to  historiology  the  task  of
disclosing  the  ‘past’,  then  the  historiological  thematizing  of  history  is
possible  only  if,  in  general,  the  ‘past’  has  in  each  case  already  been
disclosed.  Quite  apart  from  the  question  of  whether  sufficient  sources  are
available for the historiological envisagement of the past, the way to it must
in  general  be  open if  we  are  to  go  back  to  it  historiologically.  It  is  by  no
means patent that anything of the sort is the case, or how this is possible.

But in so far as Dasein’s Being is historical—that is to say, in so far as by
reason  of  its  ecstatico-horizonal  temporality  it  is  open  in  its  character  of
“having-been”—the way is in general prepared for such thematizing of the
‘past’ as can be accomplished in existence. And because Dasein, and  only
Dasein,  is  primordially  historical,  that  which  historiological  thematizing
presents  as  a  possible  object  for  research,  must  have  the  kind  of  Being  of
Dasein which has-been-there. Along  with  any  factical  Dasein  as  Being-in-
the-world,  there  is also,  in  each  case,  world-history.  If  Dasein  is  there  no
longer,  then  the  world  too  is  something  that  has-been-there.  This  is  not  in
conflict  with  the  fact  that,  all  the  same,  what  was  formerly  ready-to-hand
within-the-world  does  not  yet  pass  away,  but  becomes  something  that  one
can,  in  a  Present,  come  across  ‘historiologically’  as  something  which  has
not passed away and which belongs to the world that has-been-there.

H. 394

 

Remains,  monuments,  and  records  that  are  still  present-at-hand,  are
possible  ‘material’  for  the  concrete  disclosure  of  the  Dasein  which  has-
been-there. Such things can turn into historiological material only because,
in  accordance  with  their  own  kind  of  Being,  they  have  a  world-historical
character.  And  they  become  such  material  only  when  they  have  been
understood  in  advance  with  regard  to  their  within-the-world-ness.  The
world that has already been projected is given a definite character by way of
an  Interpretation  of  the  world-historical  material  we  have  ‘received’.  Our
going  back  to  ‘the  past’  does  not  first  get  its  start  from  the  acquisition,
sifting, and securing of such material; these activities presuppose historical
Being  towards  the  Dasein  that  has-been-there—that  is  to  say,  they
presuppose  the  historicality  of  the  historian’s  existence.  This  is  the
existential foundation for historiology as a science, even for its most trivial
and ‘mechanical’ procedures.(xi)

If  historiology  is  rooted  in  historicality  in  this  manner,  then  it  is  from
here that we must determine what the object of historiology ‘really’ is. The
delimitation of the primordial theme of historiology will have to be carried
through  in  conformity  with  the  character  of  authentic  historicality  and  its
disclosure  of  “what-has-been-there”—that  is  to  say,  in  conformity  with
repetition as this disclosure. In repetition the Dasein which has-been-there
is  understood  in  its  authentic  possibility  which  has  been.  The  ‘birth’  of

historiology from authentic historicality therefore signifies that in taking as
our  primary  theme  the  historiological  object  we  are  projecting  the  Dasein
which  has-been-there  upon  its  ownmost  possibility  of  existence.  Is
historiology  thus  to  have  the  possible  for  its  theme?  Does  not  its  whole
‘meaning’ point solely to the ‘facts’—to how something has factually been?
But  what  does  it  signify  to  say  that  Dasein  is  ‘factual’?  If  Dasein  is
‘really’ actual only in existence, then its ‘factuality’ is constituted precisely
by its resolute projection of itself upon a chosen potentiality-for-Being. But
if  so,  that  which  authentically  has-been-there  ‘factually’  is  the  existentiell
possibility  in  which  fate,  destiny,  and  world-history  have  been  factically
determined. Because in each case existence  i s  only  as  factically  thrown,
historiology  will  disclose  the  quiet  force  of  the  possible  with  greater
penetration  the  more  simply  and  the  more  concretely  having-been-in-the-
world is understood in terms of its possibility, and ‘only’ presented as such.
 

xi. On  the Constitution  of historiological understanding, cf. Eduard  Spranger, ‘Zur  Theorie des
Verstehens  und  zur  geisteswissenschaftlichen  Psychologie’,  Festschrift  für  Johannes  Volkelt,  1918,
pp. 357 ff.

H. 395

 

If historiology, which itself arises from authentic historicality, reveals by
repetition the Dasein which has-been-there and reveals it in its possibility,
then historiology has already made manifest the ‘universal’ in the once-for-
all.  The  question  of  whether  the  object  of  historiology  is  just  to  put  once-
for-all ‘individual’ events into a series, or whether it also has ‘laws’ as its
objects,  is  one  that  is  radically  mistaken.  The  theme  of  historiology  is
neither  that  which  has  happened  just  once  for  all  nor  something  universal
that floats above it, but the possibility which has been factically existent.(1)
This possibility does not get repeated as such—that is to say, understood in
an  authentically  historiological  way—if  it  becomes  perverted  into  the
colourlessness  of  a  supratemporal  model.  Only  by  historicality  which  is
factical and authentic can the history of what has-been-there, as a resolute
fate,  be  disclosed  in  such  a  manner  that  in  repetition  the  ‘force’  of  the
possible gets struck home into one’s factical existence—in other words, that
it comes towards that existence in its futural character. The historicality of
unhistoriological Dasein does not take its departure from the ‘Present’ and
from what is ‘actual’ only today, in order to grope its way back from there

to something that is past; and neither does historiology. Even historiological
disclosure temporalizes itself in terms of the future. The ‘selection’ of what
is to become a possible object for historiology has already been met with in
in  which
the  factical  existentiell  choice  of  Dasein’s  historicality, 
historiology first of all arises, and in which alone it is.
 

1.  ‘Weder  das  nur  einmalig  Geschehene  noch  ein  darüber  schwebendes  Allgemeines  ist  ihr

Thema, sondern die faktisch existent gewesene Möglichkeit.’

The historiological disclosure of the ‘past’ is based on fateful repetition,
and is so far from ‘subjective’ that it alone guarantees the ‘Objectivity’ of
historiology. For the Objectivity of a science is regulated primarily in terms
of whether that science can confront us with the entity which belongs to it
as its theme, and can bring it, uncovered in the primordiality of its Being, to
our  understanding.  In  no  science  are  the  ‘universal  validity’  of  standards
and  the  claims  to  ‘universality’  which  the  “they”  and  its  common  sense
demand, less possible as criteria of ‘truth’ than in authentic historiology.

Only  because  in  each  case  the  central  theme  of  historiology  is  the
possibility of  existence  which  has-been-there,  and  because  the  latter  exists
factically in a way which is world-historical, can it demand of itself that it
takes  its  orientation  inexorably  from  the  ‘facts’.  Accordingly  this  research
as  factical  has  many  branches  and  takes  for  its  object  the  history  of
equipment, of work, of culture, of the spirit, and of ideas. As handing itself
down,  history  is,  in  itself,  at  the  same  time  and  in  each  case  always  in  an
interpretedness which belongs to it, and which has a history of its own; so
for  the  most  part  it  is  only  through  traditional  history  that  historiology
penetrates to what has-been-there itself. This is why concrete historiological
research  can,  in  each  case,  maintain  itself  in  varying  closeness  to  its
authentic  theme.  If  the  historian  ‘throws’  himself  straightway  into  the
‘world-view’ of an era, he has not thus proved as yet that he understands his
object in an authentically historical way, and not just ‘aesthetically’. And on
the other hand, the existence of a historian who ‘only’ edits sources, may be
characterized by a historicality which is authentic.

H. 396

 

Thus  the  very  prevalence  of  a  differentiated  interest  even  in  the  most
remote  and  primitive  cultures,  is  in  itself  no  proof  of  the  authentic
historicality  of  a  ‘time’.  In  the  end,  the  emergence  of  a  problem  of
‘historicism’  is  the  clearest  symptom  that  historiology  endeavours  to
alienate  Dasein  from  its  authentic  historicality.  Such  historicality  does  not
necessarily require historiology. It is not the case that unhistoriological eras
as such are unhistorical also.

The possibility that historiology in general can either be ‘used’ ‘for one’s
life’ or ‘abused’ in it, is grounded on the fact that one’s life is historical in
the  roots  of  its  Being,  and  that  therefore,  as  factically  existing,  one  has  in
each  case  made  one’s  decision  for  authentic  or  inauthentic  historicality.
Nietzsche  recognized  what  was  essential  as  to  the  ‘use  and  abuse  of
historiology for life’ in the second of his studies “out of season” (1874), and
said  it  unequivocally  and  penetratingly.  He  distinguished  three  kinds  of
historiology—the  monumental,  the  antiquarian,  and  the  critical—without
explicitly pointing out the necessity of this triad or the ground of its unity.
The threefold character of historiology is adumbrated in the historicality of
Dasein. At the same time, this historicality enables us to understand to what
extent  these  three  possibilities  must  be  united  factically  and  concretely  in
any  historiology  which  is  authentic.  Nietzsche’s  division  is  not  accidental.
The beginning of his ‘study’ allows us to suppose that he understood more
than he has made known to us.

H. 397

 

As  historical,  Dasein  is  possible  only  by  reason  of  its  temporality,  and
temporality  temporalizes  itself  in  the  ecstatico-horizonal  unity  of  its
raptures.  Dasein  exists  authentically  as  futural  in  resolutely  disclosing  a
possibility  which  it  has  chosen.  Coming  back  resolutely  to  itself  it  is,  by
repetition, open for the ‘monumental’ possibilities of human existence. The
historiology which arises from such historicality is ‘monumental’. As in the
process of having been, Dasein has been delivered over to its thrownness.
When the possible is made one’s own by repetition, there is adumbrated at
the same time the possibility of reverently preserving the existence that has-
been-there, in which the possibility seized upon has become manifest. Thus
authentic  historiology,  as  monumental,  is  ‘antiquarian’  too.  Dasein
temporalizes itself in the way the future and having been are united in the

Present.  The  Present  discloses  the  “today”  authentically,  and  of  course  as
the moment of vision. But in so far as this “today” has been interpreted in
terms  of  understanding  a  possibility  of  existence  which  has  been  seized
upon—an understanding which is repetitive in a futural manner—authentic
historiology  becomes  a  way  in  which  the  “today”  gets  deprived  of  its
character  as  present;  in  other  words,  it  becomes  a  way  of  painfully
detaching oneself from the falling publicness of the ‘today”. As authentic,
the historiology which is both monumental and antiquarian is necessarily a
critique  of  the  ‘Present’.  Authentic  historicality  is  the  foundation  for  the
possibility  of  uniting  these  three  ways  of  historiology.  But  the  ground on
which  authentic  historiology  is  founded  is  temporality  as  the  existential
meaning of the Being of care.

The  existential-historical  source  of  historiology  may  be  presented
concretely  by  analysing  the  thematization  which  is  constitutive  for  this
science.  In  historiological  thematizing,  the  main  point  is  the  cultivation  of
the  hermeneutical  Situation  which—once  the  historically  existent  Dasein
has  made  its  resolution—opens  itself  to  the  repetitive  disclosure  of  what
has-been-there. The possibility and the structure of historiological truth are
to  be  expounded  in  terms  of  the  authentic  disclosedness  (‘truth’)  of
historical  existence.  But  since  the  basic  concepts  of  the  historiological
sciences—whether  they  pertain  to  the  Objects  of  these  sciences  or  to  the
way in which these are treated—are concepts of existence, the theory of the
humane  science  presupposes  an  existential  Interpretation  which  has  as  its
theme the historicality of Dasein. Such an Interpretation is the constant goal
to  which  the  researches  of  Wilhelm  Dilthey  seek  to  bring  us  closer,  and
which  gets  illumined  in  a  more  penetrating  fashion  by  the  ideas  of  Count
Yorck von Wartenburg.

77.  The  Connection  of  the  Foregoing  Exposition  of  the  Problem  of
Historicality  with  the  Researches  of  Wilhelm  Dilthey  and  the  Ideas  of
Count Yorck
 

1. In this section we have relaxed some of our usual conventions in view of the special stylistic
character  of  the  quotations  from  Count  Yorck  and  Heidegger’s  own  minor  inconsistencies  in
punctuation.  In  particular,  we  shall  now  translate  ‘Historie’  as  ‘History’  with  a  capital  ‘H’,  rather
than as ‘historiology.’

The  analysis  of  the  problem  of  history  which  we  have  just  carried
through has arisen in the process of appropriating the labours of Dilthey. It
has been corroborated and at the same time strengthened, by the theses of
Count Yorck, which are found scattered through his letters to him.(xii)

The image of Dilthey which is still widely disseminated today is that of
the ‘sensitive’ interpreter of the history of the spirit, especially the history
of literature, who ‘also’ endeavours to distinguish between the natural and
the  humane  sciences,  thereby  assigning  [zuweist]  a  distinctive  role  to  the
history of the latter group and likewise to ‘psychology’, then allowing the
whole  to  merge  together  in  a  relativistic  ‘philosophy  of  life’.  Considered
superficially,  this  sketch  is  ‘correct’.  But  the  ‘substance’  eludes  it,  and  it
covers up more than it reveals.
 

xii.  Cf.  Briefwechsel  zwischen  Wilhelm  Dilthey  und  dem  Grafen  Paul  Yorck  von  Wartenburg

1877-1897, Halle-an-der-Saale, 1923.

H. 398

 

We  may  divide  Dilthey’s  researches  schematically  into  three  domains:
studies  on  the  theory  of  the  humane  sciences,  and  the  distinction  between
these and the natural sciences; researches into the history of the sciences of
man, society, and the state; endeavours towards a psychology in which the
‘whole  fact  of  man’  is  to  be  presented.  Investigations  in  the  theory  of
science,  in  historical  science,  and  in  psychological  hermeneutics  are
constantly permeating and intersecting each other. Where any one point of
view  predominates,  the  others  are  the  motives  and  the  means.  What  looks
like  disunity  and  an  unsure,  ‘haphazard’  way  of  ‘trying  things  out’,  is  an
elemental  restlessness,  the  one  goal  of  which  is  to  understand  ‘life’
philosophically  and  to  secure  for  this  understanding  a  hermeneutical
foundation  in  terms  of  ‘life  itself’.  Everything  centres  in  psychology,  in
which ‘life’ is to be understood in the historical context of its development
and  its  effects,  and  understood  as  the  way  in  which  man,  as  the  possible
object of the humane sciences, and especially as the root of these sciences,
is. Hermeneutics  is  the  way  this  understanding  enlightens  itself;  it  is  also
the methodology of historiology, though only in a derivative form.

In the contemporaneous discussions, Dilthey’s own researches for laying
the basis for the humane sciences were forced one-sidedly into the field of

the  theory  of  science;  and  it  was  of  course  with  a  regard  for  such
discussions  that  his  publications  were  often  oriented  in  this  direction.  But
the  ‘logic  of  the  humane  sciences’  was  by  no  means  central  for  him—no
more  than  he  was  striving  in  his  ‘psychology’  ‘merely’  to  make
improvements in the positive science of the psychical.

Dilthey’s  friend,  Count  Yorck,  gives  unambiguous  expression  to
Dilthey’s ownmost philosophical tendency in the communications between
them,  when  he  alludes  to  ‘our  common  interest  in  understanding
historicality’ (italicized  by  the  author).(xiii)  Dilthey’s  researches  are  only
now  becoming  accessible  in  their  full  scope;  if  we  are  to  make  them  our
own, we need the steadiness and concreteness of coming to terms with them
in  principle.  This  not  the  place  [Ort]  for  discussing  in  detail  the  problems
which moved him, or how he was moved by them.(xiv) We shall, however,
describe  in  a  provisional  way  some  of  Count  Yorck’s  central  ideas,  by
selecting characteristic passages from the letters.
 

xiii. Briefwechsel, p. 185.
xiv.  We  can  forgo  this  all  the  more  because  we  are  indebted  to  G.  Misch  for  a  concrete
presentation  of  Dilthey  which  is  aimed  at  his  central  tendencies,  and  which  is  indispensable  for
coming to terms with Dilthey’s work. Cf. his introduction to Wilhelm Dilthey, Gesammelte Schriften,
vol. V (1924), pp. vii-cxvii.

H. 399

 

In these communications, Yorck’s own tendency is brought to life by the
labours of Dilthey and his ways of formulating questions, and it shows itself
when Yorck takes his stand as to the tasks of the discipline which is to lay
the basis—analytical psychology. On Dilthey’s Academy paper, ‘Ideen über
eine beschreibende und zergliedernde Psycholgie’ (1894), he writes: ‘It gets
firmly laid down that the consideration of the Self is the primary means of
knowing, and that the primary procedure of knowing is analysis. From this
standpoint  principles  get  formulated  which  are  verified  by  their  own
findings. No progress is made towards critically breaking down constructive
psychology and its assumptions, or towards explaining it and  thus  refuting
it from within’ (Briefwechsel, p. 177). ‘...your disregard for breaking things
down 
their  provenience
psychologically, and carrying this out trenchantly in detail) is connected, in
my opinion, with your conception of the theory of knowledge and with the

for  demonstrating 

critically 

(that 

is, 

position  which  you  assign  [zuweisen]  to  it’  (p.  177).  ‘...only  a  theory  of
knowledge  gives  the explanation for  this  inapplicability  (the  fact  of  it  has
been laid down and made plain). It has to render account for the adequacy
of scientific methods; it has to provide the grounds for a doctrine of method,
instead  of  having  its  methods  taken—at  a  venture,  I  must  say—from
particular areas’ (pp. 179 f.).

At  bottom  Yorck  is  demanding  a  logic  that  shall  stride  ahead  of  the
sciences  and  guide  them,  as  did  the  logic  of  Plato  and  Aristotle;  and  this
demand  includes  the  task  of  working  out,  positively  and  radically,  the
different  categorial  structures  of  those  entities  which  are  Nature  and  of
those which are history  (Dasein).  Yorck  finds  that  Dilthey’s  investigations
‘put  too  little  stress  on  differentiation  generically  between  the  ontical  and
the  Historical’  (p.  191,  italicized  by  the  author).  ‘In  particular,  the
procedure  of  comparison  is  claimed  to  be  the  method  for  the  humane
sciences.  Here  I  disagree  with  you...  Comparison  is  always  aesthetic,  and
always  adheres  to  the  pattern  of  things.  Windelband  assigns  [weist...  zu]
patterns to history. Your concept of the type is an entirely inward one. Here
it is a matter of characteristics, not of patterns. For Windelband, history is a
series  of  pictures,  of  individual  patterns—an  aesthetic  demand.  To  the
natural  scientist,  there  remains,  beside  his  science,  as  a  kind  of  human
tranquillizer,  only  aesthetic  enjoyment.  But  your  conception  of  history  is
that  of  a  nexus  of  forces,  of  unities  of  force,  to  which  the  category  of
“pattern” is to be applicable only by a kind of transference’ (p. 193).

H. 400

 

In terms of his sure instinct for ‘differentiating between the ontical and
the Historical’, Yorck knew how strongly traditional historical research still
maintains itself in ‘purely ocular ways of ascertaining’ (p. 192), which  are
aimed at the corporeal and at that which has pattern.

‘Ranke  is  a  great  ocularist,  for  whom  things  that  have  vanished  can
the
never  become  actualities...  Ranke’s  whole 
explanation  for  the  way  the  material  of  history  has  been  restricted  to  the
political.  Only  the  political  is  dramatic’  (p.  60).  ‘The  modifications  which
the course of time has brought appear unessential to me, and I should like to
appraise this very differently. For instance, I regard the so-called Historical
school as a mere sidestream within the same river-bed, and as representing

tribe  also  provides 

only  one  branch  of  an  old  and  thoroughgoing  opposition.  The  name  is
somewhat  deceptive.  That  school  was  by  no  means  a  Historical  one
(italicized  by  the  author),  but  an  antiquarian  one,  construing  things
aesthetically,  while  the  great  dominating  activity  was  one  of  mechanical
construction.  Hence  what  it  contributed  methodologically—to  the  method
of rationality—was only a general feeling’ (pp. 68 f.).

H. 401

 

‘The  genuine  Philologus—he  conceives  of  History  as  a  cabinet  of
antiquities.(1)  Where  nothing  is  palpable—whither  one  has  been  guided
only  by  a  living  psychical  transposition—these  gentlemen  never  come.  At
heart  they  are  natural  scientists,  and  they  become  sceptics  all  the  more
because  experimentation  is  lacking.  We  must  keep  wholly  aloof  from  all
such  rubbish,  for  instance,  as  how  often  Plato  was  in  Magna  Graecia  or
Syracuse. On this nothing vital depends. This superficial affectation which I
have seen through critically, winds up at last with a big question-mark and
is  put  to  shame  by  the  great  Realities  of  Homer,  Plato,  and  the  New
Testament. Everything that is actually Real becomes a mere phantom when
one considers it as a “Thing in itself”—when it does not get Experienced’
(p. 61). ‘These “scientists” stand over against the powers of the times like
the  over-refined  French  society  of  the  revolutionary  period.  Here  as  there,
formalism, the cult of the form; the defining of relationship is the last word
in  wisdom.  Naturally,  thought  which  runs  in  this  direction  has  its  own
history,  which,  I  suppose,  is  still  unwritten.  The  groundlessness  of  such
thinking  and  of  any  belief  in  it  (and  such  thinking,  epistemologically
considered,  is  a  metaphysical  attitude)  is  a  Historical  product’  (p.  39).  ‘It
seems to me that the ground-swells evoked by the principle of eccentricity,
(2) which led to a new era more than four hundred years ago, have become
exceedingly broad and flat; that our knowledge has progressed to the point
of cancelling itself out; that man has withdrawn so far from himself that he
no longer sees himself at all. The “modern man”—that is to say, the post-
Renaissance  man—is  ready  for  burial’  (p.  83).  On  the  other  hand,  “All
History that is truly alive and not just reflecting a tinge of life, is a critique’
(p.  19).  ‘But  historical  knowledge  is,  for  the  best  part,  knowledge  of  the
hidden sources’ (p. 109). ‘With history, what makes a spectacle and catches
the eye is not the main thing. The nerves are invisible, just as the essentials

in general are invisible. While it is said that “if you were quiet, you would
be strong”, the variant is also true that “if you are quiet, you will perceive—
that is, understand” ’ (p. 26). ‘And then I enjoy the quietude of soliloquizing
and  communing  with  the  spirit  of  history.  This  spirit  is  one  who  did  not
appear  to  Faust  in  his  study,  or  to  Master  Goethe  either.  But  they  would
have felt no alarm in making way for him, however grave and compelling
such an apparition might be. For he is brotherly, akin to us in another and
deeper  sense  than  are  the  denizens  of  bush  and  field.  These  exertions  are
like  Jacob’s  wrestling—a  sure  gain  for  the  wrestler  himself.  Indeed  this  is
what matters first of all’ (p. 133).
 

1.  Yorck  is  here  referring  to  Karl  Friedrich  Hermann,  whose  Geschichte  und  System  der

platonischen Philosophie (Heidelberg, 1839) he has been reading.

2. Presumably the eccentricity of the planetary motions as described by Kepler, following on the

work of Copernicus.

H. 402

 

Yorck  gained  his  clear  insight  into  the  basic  character  of  history  as
‘virtuality’ from his knowledge of the character of the Being which human
Dasein itself possesses, not from the Objects of historical study, as a theory
of science would demand. ‘The entire psycho-physical datum is not one that
is  (Here  “Being”  equals  the  Being-present-at-hand  of  Nature.—Author’s
remark) but one that lives; this is the germinal point of historicality.(1) And
if  the  consideration  of the  Self  is  directed not  at  an abstract “I”  but  at  the
fulness of my Self, it will find me Historically determined, just as physics
knows me as cosmically determined. Just as I am Nature, so I am history...’
(p. 71). And Yorck, who saw through all bogus ‘defining of relationships’
and  ‘groundless’  relativisms,  did  not  hesitate  to  draw  the  final  conclusion
from his insight into the historicality of Dasein. ‘But, on the other hand, in
view  of  the  inward  historicality  of  self-consciousness,  a  systematic  that  is
divorced  from  History  is  methodologically  inadequate.  Just  as  physiology
cannot be studied in abstraction from physics, neither can philosophy from
historicality—especially  if  it  is  a  critical  philosophy.  Behaviour  and
historicality  are  like  breathing  and  atmospheric  pressure;  and—this  may
sound  rather  paradoxical—it  seems  to  me  methodologically  like  a  residue
from metaphysics not to historicize one’s philosophizing’ (p. 69). ‘Because
to  philosophize  is  to  live,  there  is,  in  my  opinion  (do  not  be  alarmed!),  a

philosophy of history—but who would be able to write it? Certainly it is not
the sort of thing it has hitherto been taken to be, or the sort that has so far
been attempted; you have declared yourself incontrovertibly against all that.
Up till now, the question has been formulated in a way which is false, even
impossible; but this is not the only way of formulating it. Thus there is no
longer  any  actual  philosophizing  which  would  not  be  Historical.  The
separation  between  systematic  philosophy  and  Historical  presentation  is
essentially incorrect’ (p. 251). ‘That a science can become practical is now,
of course, the real basis for its justification. But the mathematical praxis is
not  the  only  one.  The  practical  aim  of  our  standpoint  is  one  that  is
pedagogical in the broadest and deepest sense of the word. Such an aim is
the soul of all true philosophy, and the truth of Plato and Aristotle’ (pp. 42
f.). ‘You know my views on the possibility of ethics as a science. In spite of
that, this can always be done a little better. For whom are such books really
written? Registries about registries! The only thing worthy of notice is what
drives  them  to  come  from  physics  to  ethics’  (p.  73).  ‘If  philosophy  is
conceived  as  a  manifestation  of  life,  and  not  as  the  coughing  up  of  a
baseless kind of thinking (and such thinking appears baseless because one’s
glance gets turned away from the basis of consciousness), then one’s task is
as meagre in its results as it is complicated and arduous in the obtaining of
them. Freedom from prejudice is what it presupposes, and such freedom is
hard to gain’ (p. 250).
 

1.  Yorck’s  text  reads  as  follows:  ‘Das  die  gesammte  psychophysische  Gegebenheit  nicht    i  s  t
  sondern  lebt,  ist  der  Keimpunkt  der  Geschichtlichkeit’.  Heidegger  plausibly  changes  ‘Das’  to
‘...dass’ in the earlier editions, to ‘Dass’ in the later ones.

H. 403

 

It is plain from Yorck’s allusion to the kind of difficulty met with in such
investigations,  that  he  himself  was  already  on  the  way  to  bringing  within
our grasp categorially the Historical as opposed to the ontical (ocular), and
to  raising  up  ‘life’  into  the  kind  of  scientific  understanding  that  is
appropriate  to  it.  The  aesthetico-mechanistic  way  of  thinking(1)  ‘finds
verbal  expression  more  easily  than  does  an  analysis  that  goes  behind
intuition, and this can be explained by the wide extent to which words have
their  provenience  in  the  ocular...  On  the  other  hand,  that  which  penetrates
into  the  basis  of  vitality  eludes  an  exoteric  presentation;  hence  all  its

terminology  is  symbolic  and  ineluctable,  not  intelligible  to  all.  Because
philosophical  thinking  is  of  a  special  kind,  its  linguistic  expression  has  a
special  character’  (pp.  70  f.).  ‘But  you  are  acquainted  with  my  liking  for
paradox, which I justify by saying that paradoxicality is a mark of truth, and
that the communis  opinio  is  nowhere  in  the  truth,  but  is  like  an  elemental
precipitate of a halfway understanding which makes generalizations; in its
relationship  to  truth  it  is  like  the  sulphurous  fumes  which  the  lightning
leaves  behind.  Truth  is  never  an  element.  To  dissolve  elemental  public
opinion,  and,  as  far  as  possible,  to  make  possible  the  moulding  of
individuality  in  seeing  and  looking,  would  be  a  pedagogical  task  for  the
state. Then, instead of a so-called public conscience—instead of this radical
externalization—individual  consciences—that  is  to  say,  consciences—
would again become powerful’ (pp. 249 f.).
 

1.  Yorck  is  here  discussing  Lotze  and  Fechner,  and  suggesting  that  their  ‘rare  talent  for
expression’ was abetted by their ‘aesthetico-mechanistic way of thinking’, as Heidegger calls it. The
reader  who  is  puzzled  by  the  way  Yorck  lumps  together  the  ‘aesthetic’,  the  ‘mechanistic’,  and  the
‘intuitive’, should bear in mind that here the words ‘aesthetic’ and ‘intuition’ are used in the familiar
Kantian  sense  of  immediate  sensory  experience,  and  that  Yorck  thinks  of  ‘mechanism’  as  falling
entirely within the ‘horizon’ of such experience without penetrating beyond it.

the  ontical,  and  conceive 

If one has an interest in understanding historicality, one is brought to the
task  of  working  out  a  ‘generic  differentiation  between  the  ontical  and  the
Historical’.  The  fundamental  aim  of  the  ‘philosophy  of  life’(1)  is  tied  up
with  this.  Nevertheless,  the  formulation  of  the  question  needs  to  be
radicalized  in  principle.  How  are  we  to  get  historicality  into  our  grasp
philosophically  as  distinguished  from 
it
‘categorially’, except by bringing both the ‘ontical’ and the ‘Historical’ into
a more primordial unity, so  that  they  can  be  compared  and  distinguished?
But  that  is  possible  only  if  we  attain  the  following  insights:  (1)  that  the
question of historicality is an ontological question about the state of Being
of  historical  entities;  (2)  that  the  question  of  the  ontical  is  the  ontological
question  of  the  state  of  Being  of  entities  other  than  Dasein—of  what  is
present-at-hand in the widest sense; (3) that the ontical is only one domain
of  entities.  The  idea  of  Being  embraces  both  the  ‘ontical’  and  the
‘Historical’.  It  is  this  idea  which  must 
itself  be  ‘generically
differentiated’.
 

let 

1. ‘ “Lebensphilosophie” ’. The word is italicized only in the later editions.

H. 404

 

It is not by chance that Yorck calls those entities which are not historical,
simply  the  “ontical”.  This  just  reflects  the  unbroken  dominion  of  the
traditional ontology, which, as derived from the ancient way of formulating
the  question  of  Being,  narrows  down  the  ontological  problematic  in
principle  and  holds  it  fact.  The  problem  of  differentiating  between  the
ontical and the  Historical  cannot be worked  out  as a problem  for  research
unless we  have made  sure in  advance what is  the  clue to  it,  by clarifying,
through  fundamental  ontology,  the  question  of  the  meaning  of  Being  in
general.(xv)  Thus  it  becomes  plain  in  what  sense  the  preparatory
existential-temporal  analytic  of  Dasein  is  resolved  to  foster  the  spirit  of
Count Yorck in the service of Dilthey’s work.
 

xv. Cf. Sections 5 and 6, H. 15 ff.

VI: TEMPORALITY AND WITHIN-TIME-NESS AS THE

SOURCE OF THE ORDINARY CONCEPTION OF TIME

 

Dasein
 

78.  The  Incompleteness  of  the  Foregoing  Temporal  Analysis  of

To  demonstrate  that  temporality  is  constitutive  for  Dasein’s  Being  and
how  it  is  thus  constitutive,  we  have  shown  that  historicality,  as  a  state-of-
Being  which  belongs  to  existence,  is  ‘at  bottom’  temporality.  We  have
carried  through  our  Interpretation  of  the  temporal  character  of  history
without  regard  for  the  ‘fact’  that  all  historizing  runs  its  course  ‘in  time’.
Factically,  in  the  everyday  understanding  of  Dasein,  all  history  is  known
merely  as  that  which  happens  ‘within-time’;  but  throughout  the  course  of
our  existential-temporal  analysis  of  historicality,  this  understanding  has
been  ruled  out  of  order.  If  the  existential  analytic  is  to  make  Dasein
ontologically  transparent  in  its  very  facticity,  then  the  factical  ‘ontico-
temporal’ interpretation of history must also be explicitly given its due. It is
all  the  more  necessary  that  the  time  ‘in  which’  entities  are  encountered
should be analysed in principle, since not only history but natural processes
too are determined ‘by time’. But still more elemental than the circumstance
that  the  ‘time  factor’  is  one  that  occurs  in  the  sciences  of  history  and
Nature,  is  the  Fact  that  before  Dasein  does  any  thematical  research,  it
‘reckons with time’ and regulates itself according to it. And here again what
remains  decisive  is  Dasein’s  way  of  ‘reckoning  with  its  time’—a  way  of
reckoning which precedes any use of measuring equipment by which time
can be determined. The reckoning is prior to such equipment, and is what
makes anything like the use of clocks possible at all.

In  its  factical  existence,  any  particular  Dasein  either  ‘has  the  time’  or
‘does not have it’. It either ‘takes time’ for something or ‘cannot allow any
time for it’. Why does Dasein ‘take time’, and why can it ‘lose’ it? Where
does it take time from? How is this time related to Dasein’s temporality?

H. 405

 

Factical  Dasein  takes  time  into  its  reckoning,  without  any  existential
understanding of temporality. Reckoning with time is an elemental kind of
behaviour which must be clarified before we turn to the question of what it
means  to  say  that  entities  are  ‘in  time’.  All  Dasein’s  behaviour  is  to  be
Interpreted in terms of its Being—that is, in terms of temporality. We must
show  how  Dasein  as temporality  temporalizes  a  kind  of  behaviour  which
relates  itself  to  time  by  taking  it  into  its  reckoning.  Thus  our  previous
characterization of temporality is not only quite incomplete in that we have
not  paid  attention  to  all  the  dimensions  of  this  phenomenon;  it  also  is
defective  in  principle  because  something  like  world-time,  in  the  rigorous
sense  of  the  existential-temporal  conception  of  the  world,  belongs  to
temporality  itself.  We  must  come  to  understand  how  this  is  possible  and
why it is necessary. Thus the ‘time’ which is familiar to us in the ordinary
way—the  time  ‘in  which’  entities  occur—will  be  illuminated,  and  so  will
the within-time-ness of these entities.

Everyday  Dasein,  the  Dasein  which  takes  time,  comes  across  time
proximally  in  what  it  encounters  within-the-world  as  ready-to-hand  and
present-at-hand.  The  time  which  it  has  thus  ‘experienced’  is  understood
within the horizon of that way of understanding Being which is the closest
for  Dasein;  that  is,  it  is  understood  as  something  which  is  itself  somehow
present-at-hand.  How  and  why  Dasein  comes  to  develop  the  ordinary
conception  of  time,  must  be  clarified  in  terms  of  its  state-of-Being  as
concerning  itself  with  time—a  state-of-Being  with  a  temporal  foundation.
The  ordinary  conception  of  time  owes  its  origin  to  a  way  in  which
primordial  time  has  been  levelled  off.  By  demonstrating  that  this  is  the
source of the ordinary conception, we shall justify our earlier Interpretation
of temporality as primordial time.

In  the  development  of  this  ordinary  conception,  there  is  a  remarkable
vacillation as to whether the character to be attributed to time is ‘subjective’
or  ‘Objective’.  Where  time  is  taken  as  being  in  itself,  it  gets  allotted  pre-
eminently  to  the  ‘soul’  notwithstanding.  And  where  it  has  the  kind  of
character which belongs to ‘consciousness’, it still functions ‘Objectively’.
In Hegel’s Interpretation of time both possibilities are brought to the point
where, in a certain manner, they cancel each other out. Hegel tries to define
the  connection  between  ‘time’  and  ‘spirit’  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make

intelligible  why  the  spirit,  as  history,  ‘falls  into  time’.  We  seem  to  be  in
accord  with  Hegel  in  the  results  of  the  Interpretation  we  have  given  for
Dasein’s temporality and for the way world-time belongs to it. But because
our  analysis  differs  in  principle  from  his  in  its  approach,  and  because  its
orientation  is  precisely  the  opposite  of  his  in  that  it  aims  at  fundamental
ontology,  a  short  presentation  of  Hegel’s  way  of  taking  the  relationship
between time and spirit may serve to make plain our existential-ontological
Interpretation  of  Dasein’s  temporality,  of  world-time,  and  of  the  source  of
the ordinary conception of time, and may settle this in a provisional manner.

H. 406

The question of whether and how time has any ‘Being’, and of why and
in what sense we designate it as ‘being’, cannot be answered until we have
shown to what extent temporality itself, in the totality of its temporalizing
makes it possible  for  us  somehow  to  have  an  understanding  of  Being  and
address  ourselves  to  entities.  Our  chapter  will  be  divided  as  follows:
Dasein’s temporality, and our concern with time (Section 79); the time with
which  we  concern  ourselves,  and  within-time-ness  (Section  80);  within-
time-ness and the genesis of the ordinary conception of time (Section 81); a
comparison of the existential-ontological connection of temporality, Dasein,
and world-time, with Hegel’s way of taking the relation between time and
spirit  (Section  82);  the  existential-temporal  analytic  of  Dasein  and  the
question  of  fundamental  ontology  as  to  the  meaning  of  Being  in  general
(Section 83).

79. Dasein’s Temporality, and our Concern with Time

Dasein exists as an entity for which, in its Being, that Being is itself an
issue. Essentially ahead of itself, it has projected itself upon its potentiality-
for-Being  before  going  on  to  any  mere  consideration  of  itself.  In  its
projection it reveals itself as something which has been thrown. It has been
thrownly abandoned to the ‘world’, and falls into it concernfully.(1) As care
—that is, as existing in the unity of the projection which has been fallingly
thrown—this entity has been disclosed as a “there”. As being with Others, it
maintains itself in  an average way  of interpreting—a way  which has been

 

 

Articulated in discourse and expressed in language. Being-in-the-world has
always expressed itself, and as Being alongside entities encountered within-
the-world,  it  constantly  expresses  itself  in  addressing  itself  to  the  very
object  of  its  concern  and  discussing  it.  The  concern  of  circumspective
common  sense  is  grounded  in  temporality—indeed  in  the  mode  of  a
making-present  which  retains  and  awaits.  Such  concern,  as  concernfully
reckoning  up,  planning,  preventing,  or  taking  precautions,  always  says
(whether audibly or not) that something is to happen ‘then’, that something
else is to be attended to ‘beforehand’, that what has failed or eluded us ‘on
that former occasion’ is something that we must ‘now’ make up for.(2)
 

1. ‘Geworfen der “Welt” überlassen, verfällt es besorgend an sie.’
2.  ‘…“dann”—soll  das  geschehen,  “zuvor”—jenes  seine  Erledigung  finden,  “jezt”—das
nachgeholt werden, was “damals” misslang und entging.’ Notice that the German ‘dann’, unlike its
English cognate ‘then’, is here thought of as having primarily a future reference.

H. 407

 

In the ‘then’, concern expresses itself as awaiting; in the ‘on that former
occasion’, as retaining; in the ‘now’, as making present. In the ‘then’—but
mostly unexpressed—lies the ‘now-not-yet’; that is to say, this is spoken in
a  making-present  which  is  either  awaitingly  retentive  or  awaitingly
forgetful. In the ‘on that former occasion’ lurks the ‘now-no-longer’. With
this, retaining expresses itself as a making-present which awaits. The ‘then’
and  the  ‘on  that  former  occasion’  are  understood  with  regard  to  a  ‘now’;
that is to say, making present has a peculiar importance. Of course it always
temporalizes itself in a unity with awaiting and retaining, even if these may
take the modified form of a forgetting which does not await anything; in the
mode of such forgetting, temporality ensnares itself in the Present, which, in
making  present,  says  pre-eminently  ‘Now!  Now!’  That  which  concern
awaits  as  what  is  closest  to  it,  gets  addressed  in  the  ‘forthwith’  [im
“sogleich”];  what  has  been  made  proximally  available  or  has  been  lost  is
addressed  in  the  ‘just-now’  [im  “soeben”].  The  horizon  for  the  retaining
which expresses itself in the ‘on that former occasion’ is the ‘earlier’; the
horizon for the ‘then’ is the ‘later on’ (‘that which is to come’); the horizon
for the ‘now’ is the ‘today’.

Every  ‘then’,  however,  is,  as  such,  a  ‘then,  when...’;  every  ‘on  that
former occasion’ is an ‘on that former occasion, when...’; every ‘now’ is a

‘now  that...’.(1)  The  ‘now’,  the  ‘then’,  and  the  ‘on  that  former  occasion’
thus  have  a  seemingly  obvious  relational  structure  which  we  call
“datability”  [Datierbarkeit].  Whether  this  dating  is  factically  done  with
respect  to  a  ‘date’  on  the  calendar,  must  still  be  completely  disregarded.
Even  without  ‘dates’  of  this  sort,  the  ‘now’,  the  ‘then’,  and  the  ‘on  that
former occasion’ have been dated more or less definitely. And even if the
dating  is  not  made  more  definite,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  structure  of
datability is missing or that it is just a matter of chance.
 

1. ‘Jedes “dann” aber ist als solthes ein “dann, wann...”, jedes “damals” ein “damals, als...”, jedes

“jetzt” ein “jetzt, da…”.’
 

Wherein  is  such  datability  grounded,  and  to  what  does  it  essentially
belong? Can  any  more  superfluous  question  indeed  be  raised?  It  is  ‘well
known’ that what we have in mind with the ‘now that...’ is a ‘point of time’.
The ‘now’ is time. Incontestably, the ‘now that...’, the ‘then, when…’, and
the  ‘on  that  former  occasion’  are  things  that  we  understand.  And  we  also
understand in a certain way that these are all connected with ‘time’. But that
with this sort of thing one has ‘time’ itself in mind, and how this is possible,
and  what  ‘time’  signifies—these  are  matters  of  which  we  have  no
conception  in  our  ‘natural’  understanding  of  the  ‘now’  and  so  forth.  Is  it
indeed obvious, then, that something like the ‘then’, the ‘now’, and the ‘on
that  former  occasion’,  is  something  we  ‘understand  without  further  ado’,
and  ‘quite  naturally’  bring  to  expression?  Where  do  we  get  this  ‘now
that...’? Have we found this sort of thing among entities within-the-world—
among those that are present-at-hand? Manifestly not. Then have we found
it  at  all?  Have  we  ever  set  ourselves  to  search  for  this  and  establish  its
character?  We  avail  ourselves  of  it  ‘at  any  time’  without  having  taken  it
over  explicitly,  and  we  constantly  make  use  of  it  even  though  we  do  not
always make utterances about it. Even in the most trivial, offhand kind of
everyday talk (‘It’s cold’, for instance) we also have in mind a ‘now that...’.
Why is it that when Dasein addresses itself to the objects of its concern, it
also  expresses  a  ‘now  that...’,  a  ‘then,  when...’,  or  an  ‘on  that  former
occasion, when...’, even though it does so mostly without uttering it? First,
because in addressing itself to something interpretatively, it expresses itself
too;  that  is  to  say,  it  expresses  its  Being  alongside  the  ready-to-hand—a
Being  which understands circumspectively and which uncovers  the  ready-
to-hand  and  lets  it  be  encountered.  And  secondly,  because  this  very

addressing  and  discussing—which  interprets  itself  also—is  based  upon  a
making-present and is possible only as such.(i)
 

i. Cf. Section 33, H. 154 ff.

H. 408

 

The making-present which awaits and retains, interprets itself.  And this
in turn is possible only because, as something which in itself is ecstatically
open,  it  has  in  each  case  been  disclosed  to  itself  already  and  can  be
Articulated  in  the  kind  of  interpretation  which  is  accompanied  by
understanding  and  discourse.  Because  temporality  is  ecstatico-horizonally
constitutive  for  the  clearedness  of  the  “there”,  temporality  is  always
primordially interpretable in the “there” and is accordingly familiar to us.
The making-present which interprets itself—in other words, that which has
been interpreted and is addressed in the ‘now’—is what we call ‘time’. This
simply makes known to us that temporality—which, as ecstatically open, is
recognizable—is  familiar,  proximally  and  for  the  most  part,  only  as
interpreted  in  this  concernful  manner.(1)  But  while  time  is  ‘immediately’
intelligible  and  recognizable,  this  does  not  preclude  the  possibility  that
primordial temporality as such may remain unknown and unconceived, and
that  this  is  also  the  case  with  the  source  of  the  time  which  has  been
expressed—a source which temporalizes itself in that temporality.
 

1.  ‘Das  sich  auslegende  Gegenwärtigen,  das  heisst  das  im  “jetzt”  angesprochene  Ausgelegte
nennen  wir  “Zeit”.  Darin  bekundet  sich  lediglich,  dass  die  Zeitlichkeit,  als  ekstatisch  offene
kenntlich,  zunächst  und  zumeist  nur  in  dieser  besorgenden  Ausgelegtheit  bekannt  ist.’  The  older
editions have ‘ausgesprochene’ (‘expressed’) rather than ‘angesprochene’ (‘addressed’); the comma
after ‘Zeitlichkeit’ is missing, and the particle ‘ja’ appears just before ‘zunächst’.

The  fact  that  the  structure  of  datability  belongs  essentially  to  what  has
been  interpreted  with  the  ‘now’,  the  ‘then’,  and  the  ‘on  that  former
occasion’,  becomes  the  most  elemental  proof  that  what  has  thus  been
interpreted  has  originated  in  the  temporality  which  interprets  itself.  When
we say ‘now’, we always understand a ‘now that so and so...’(1) though we
do not say all this. Why? Because the “now” interprets a making-present of
entities. In the ‘now that...’ lies the ecstatical character of the Present. The
datability  of  the  ‘now’,  the  ‘then’,  and  the  ‘on  that  former  occasion’,

reflects the ecstatical constitution of temporality,  and is  therefore essential
for the time itself that has been expressed. The structure of the datability of
the  ‘now’,  the  ‘then’,  and  the  ‘on  that  former  occasion’,  is  evidence  that
these,  stemming  from  temporality,  are  themselves  time.  The  interpretative
expressing of the ‘now’, the ‘then’, and the ‘on that former occasion’, is the
most  primordial  way  of  assigning  a  time.(2)  In  the  ecstatical  unity  of
temporality—which  gets  understood 
along  with  datability,  but
unthematically and without being recognizable as such—Dasein has already
been disclosed to itself as Being-in-the-world, and entities within-the-world
have  been  discovered  along  with  it;  because  of  this,  interpreted  time  has
already been given a dating in terms of those entities which are encountered
in the disclosedness of the “there”: “now that—the door slams”; “now that
—my book is missing”, and so forth.(3)

H. 409

 

The  horizons  which  belong  to  the  ‘now’,  the  ‘then’,  and  the  ‘on  that
former occasion’, all have their source in ecstatical temporality; by reason
of  this,  these  horizons  too  have  the  character  of  datability  as  ‘today,
when...’, ‘later on, when...’, and ‘earlier, when…’(4)
 

1.  ‘  “Jetzt”-sagend  verstehen  wir  immer  auch  schon,  ohne  es  mitzusagen,  ein  “—da  das  und

das”…’

2. ‘…dass diese vom Stamme der Zeitlichkeit, selbst Zeit sind. Das auslegende Aussprechen der
“jetzt”,  “dann”  und  “damals”  ist  die  ursprünglichste  Zeitangabe.’  The  earlier  editions  have  ‘sie’
instead  of  ‘diese’.  (While  we  have  generally  tried  to  reserve  the  verb  ‘assign’  for  verbs  such  as
‘verweisen’ and ‘zuweisen’, it is convenient to use it in this chapter to translate such expressions as
‘angeben’, ‘Angabe’, and ‘Zeitangabe’.)

3. ‘…jetzt, da—die Tür schlägt; jetzt, da—mir das Buch fehlt, und dergleichen.’ While the phrase
‘jetzt’ da...’ ordinarily means ‘now that...’, Heidegger here seems to be interpreting it with an illusion
to the ‘da’ which we have usually translated as ‘there’—the ‘da’ of ‘Dasein’.

4. ‘ “Heute, wo...”, “Späterhin, wann...” und “Früher, da…”.’

If  awaiting  understands  itself  in  the  ‘then’  and  interprets  itself,  and
thereby,  as  making  present,  understands  that  which  it  awaits,  and
understands this in terms of its ‘now’, then the ‘and-now-not-yet’ is already
implied  when  we  ‘assign’  a  ‘then’.  The  awaiting  which  makes  present
is  Articulated  by
understands 
interpretation:  it  ‘has  its  time’  as  the  “in-between”,  which  likewise  has  a
relationship  of  datability.  This  relationship  gets  expressed  in  the  ‘during-

‘until-then’.  This 

‘until-then’ 

the 

this’  or  ‘meanwhile’  [“während  dessen...”].  The  ‘during’  can  itself  be
Articulated  awaitingly  by  concern,  by  assigning  some  more  ‘thens’.  The
‘until-then’  gets  divided  up  by  a  number  of  ‘from-then-till-thens’,  which,
however,  have  been  ‘embraced’  beforehand  in  awaitingly  projecting  the
primary ‘then’. ‘Enduring’ gets Articulated in the understanding one has of
the  ‘during’  when  one  awaits  and  makes  present.(1)  This  lasting[Dauern],
in turn, is the time which is manifest in temporality’s interpretation of itself;
in our concern this time thus gets currently, but unthematically, understood
as a ‘span’ [“Spanne”]. The making-present which awaits and retains, lays
‘out’ a ‘during’ with a span, only because it has thereby disclosed itself as
the  way  in  which  its  historical  temporality  has  been  ecstatically  stretched
along,  even  though  it  does  not  know  itself  as  this.(2)  But  here  a  further
peculiarity  of  the  time  which  has  been  ‘assigned’  shows  itself.  Not  only
does the ‘during’ have a span; but every ‘now’, ‘then’, and ‘on that former
occasion’ has, with its datability-structure, its own spanned character, with
the  width  of  the  span  varying:  ‘now’—in  the  intermission,  while  one  is
eating, in the evening, in summer; ‘then’—at breakfast, when one is taking
a climb, and so forth.
 

1.  ‘Mit  dem  gewärtigend-gegenwärtigenden  Verstehen  des  “während”  wird  das  “Währen”
artikuliert.’ ‘Währen’ of course means ‘enduring’ in the sense of lasting or continuing, not in that of
‘suffering’ or ‘tolerating’.

2.  ‘Das  gewärtigend-behaltende  Gegenwärtigen  legt  nur  deshalb  ein  gespanntes  “während”
“aus”, weil es dabei sich als die ekstatische Erstrecktheit der geschichtlichen Zeitlichkeit, wenngleich
als solche unerkannt, erschlossen ist.’ Our translation of ‘gespanntes’ as ‘with a span’ preserves the
connection with ‘Spanne’ but misses the connotation of ‘tenseness’, which Heidegger clearly has in
mind elsewhere (e.g. H. 261 f., 374) and is surely suggesting here. The pun on ‘auslegen’ (‘interpret’)
and ‘legt... “aus” ’ (‘lays “out” ’) also disappears in translation.

H. 410

 

The  concern  which  awaits,  retains,  and  makes  present,  is  one  which
‘allows  itself’  so  much  time;  and  it  assigns  itself  this  time  concernfully,
even  without  determining  the  time  by  any  specific  reckoning,  and  before
any  such  reckoning  has  been  done.  Here  time  dates  itself  in  one’s  current
mode of allowing oneself time concernfully; and it does so in terms of those
very matters with which one concerns oneself environmentally, and which
have  been  disclosed  in  the  understanding  with  its  accompanying  state-of-
mind—in  terms  of  what  one  does  ‘all  day  long’.  The  more  Dasein  is

awaitingly  absorbed  in  the  object  of  its  concern  and  forgets  itself  in  not
awaiting itself, the more does even the time which it ‘allows’ itself remain
covered up by this way of ‘allowing’. When Dasein is ‘living along’ in an
everyday  concernful  manner,  it  just  never  understands  itself  as  running
along  in  a  Continuously  enduring  sequence  of  pure  ‘nows’.  By  reason  of
this  covering  up,  the  time  which  Dasein  allows  itself  has  gaps  in  it,  as  it
were. Often we do not bring a ‘day’ together again when we come back to
the time which we have ‘used’. But the time which has gaps in it does not
go  to  pieces  in  this  lack-of-togetherness,  which  is  rather  a  mode  of  that
temporality  which  has  already  been  disclosed  and  stretched  along
ecstatically.  The  manner  in  which  the  time  we  have  ‘allowed’  ‘runs  its
course’, and the way in which concern more or less explicitly assigns itself
that time, can be properly explained as phenomena only if, on the one hand,
we avoid the theoretical ‘representation’ of a Continuous stream of “nows”,
and if, on the other hand, the possible ways in which Dasein assigns itself
time and allows itself time are to be conceived of as determined primarily in
terms  of how  Dasein,  in  a  manner  corresponding  to  its  current  existence,
‘has’ its time.

In  an  earlier  passage  authentic  and  inauthentic  existing  have  been
characterized  with  regard  to  those  modes  of  the  temporalizing  of
temporality  upon  which  such  existing  is  founded.  According  to  that
characterization,  the  irresoluteness  of  inauthentic  existence  temporalizes
itself in the mode of a making-present which does not await but forgets. He
who is irresolute understands himself in terms of those very closest events
and  be-fallings  which  he  encounters  in  such  a  making-present  and  which
thrust  themselves  upon  him  in  varying  ways.  Busily  losing  himself  in  the
object  of  his  concern,  he  loses  his  time  in  it  too.  Hence  his  characteristic
way of talking—‘I have no time’. But just as he who exists inauthentically
is  constantly  losing  time  and  never  ‘has’  any,  the  temporality  of  authentic
existence  remains  distinctive  in  that  such  existence,  in  its  resoluteness,
never loses time and ‘always has time’. For the temporality of resoluteness
has, with relation to its Present, the character of a moment of vision.  When
such  a  moment  makes  the  Situation  authentically  present,  this  making-
present does not itself take the lead, but is held in that future which is in the
process  of  having-been.  One’s  existence  in  the  moment  of  vision
temporalizes  itself  as  something  that  has  been  stretched  along  in  a  way
which is fatefully whole in the sense of the authentic historical constancy of

the Self. This kind of temporal existence has its time for what the Situation
demands  of  it,  and  it  has  it  ‘constantly’.  But  resoluteness  discloses  the
“there” in this way only as a Situation. So if he who is resolute encounters
anything  that  has  been  disclosed,  he  can  never  do  so  in  such  a  way  as  to
lose his time on it irresolutely.

The  “there”  is  disclosed  in  a  way  which  is  grounded  in  Dasein’s  own
temporality as ecstatically stretched along, and with this disclosure a ‘time’
is allotted to Dasein; only because of this can Dasein, as factically thrown,
‘take’ its time and lose it.

H. 411

As  something  disclosed,  Dasein  exists  factically  in  the  way  of  Being
with  Others.  It  maintains  itself  in  an  intelligibility  which  is  public  and
average. When the ‘now that...’ and the ‘then when...’ have been interpreted
and  expressed  in  our  everyday  Being  with  one  another,  they  will  be
understood in principle, even though their dating is unequivocal only within
certain  limits.  In  the  ‘most  intimate’  Being-with-one-another  of  several
people, they can say ‘now’ and say it ‘together’, though each of them gives
a different date to the ‘now’ which he is saying: “now that this or that has
come  to  pass...”  The  ‘now’  which  anyone  expresses  is  always  said  in  the
publicness  of  Being-in-the-world  with  one  another.  Thus  the  time  which
any Dasein has currently interpreted and expressed has as such already been
given a public character  on  the  basis  of  that  Dasein’s  ecstatical  Being-in-
the-world. In so far, then, as everyday concern understands itself in terms of
the ‘world’ of its concern and takes its ‘time’, it does not know this ‘time’
as its own, but concernfully utilizes the time which ‘there is’ [“es gibt”]—
the time with which “they” reckon. Indeed the publicness of ‘time’ is all the
more  compelling,  the  more  explicitly  factical  Dasein  concerns  itself  with
time in specifically taking it into its reckoning.

80. The Time with which we Concern Ourselves, and Within-time-ness

So  far  we  have  only  had  to  understand  provisionally  how  Dasein,  as
grounded in  temporality, is,  in  its very existing, concerned with  times and
how, in such interpretative concern, time makes itself public for Being-in-

 

 

the-world.  But  the  sense  in  which  time  ‘is’  if  it  is  of  the  kind  which  is
public  and  has  been  expressed,  remains  completely  undefined,  if  indeed
such  time  can  be  considered  as  being  at  all.  Before  we  can  make  any
decision  as  to  whether  public  time  is  ‘merely  subjective’  or  ‘Objectively
actual’,  or  neither  of  these,  its  phenomenal  character  must  first  be
determined more precisely.

When  time  is  made  public,  this  does  not  happen  just  occasionally  and
subsequently.  On  the  contrary,  because  Dasein,  as  something  ecstatic-
temporal, is already disclosed, and because understanding and interpretation
both  belong  to  existence,  time  has  already  made  itself  public  in  concern.
One directs oneself according to it, so that it must somehow be the sort of
thing which Everyman can come across.

H. 412

 

Although  one  can  concern  oneself  with  time  in  the  manner  which  we
have characterized—namely, by dating in terms of environmental events—
this  always  happens  basically  within  the  horizon  of  that  kind  of  concern
with time which we know as astronomical and calendrical time-reckoning.
Such  reckoning  does  not  occur  by  accident,  but  has  its  existential-
ontological  necessity  in  the  basic  state  of  Dasein  as  care.  Because  it  is
essential to Dasein that it exists fallingly as something thrown, it interprets
its time concernfully by way of time-reckoning. In this,  the  ‘real’ making-
public  of  time  gets  temporalized,  so  that  we  must  say  that  Dasein’s
thrownness  is  the  reason  why  ‘there  is’  time  publicly.(1)  If  we  are  to
demonstrate that public time has its source in factical temporality, and if we
are to assure ourselves that this demonstration is as intelligible as possible,
the time which has been interpreted in the temporality of concern must first
be characterized, if only in order to make clear that the essence of concern
with time does not lie in the application of numerical procedures in dating.
Thus  in  time-reckoning,  what  is  decisive  from  an  existential-ontological
standpoint  is  not  to  be  seen  in  the  quantification  of  time  but  must  be
conceived  more  primordially  in  terms  of  the  temporality  of  the  Dasein
which reckons with time.
 

1. ‘In ihr zeitigt sich die “eigentliche” Veröffentlichung der Zeit, sodass gesagt werden muss: die
Geworfenheit des Daseins ist der Grund dafür, dass es öffentlich Zeit “gibt”.’ Heidegger’s quotation

marks around ‘gibt’ suggest an intentional pun which would permit the alternative translation: ‘...the
reason why Dasein “gives” time publicly.’

‘Public  time’  turns  out  to  be  the  kind  of  time  ‘in  which’  the  ready-to-
hand  and  the  present-at-hand  within-the-world  are  encountered.  This
requires that these entities which are not of the character of Dasein, shall be
called entities “within-time”. The Interpretation of within-time-ness gives us
a  more  primordial  insight  into  the  essence  of  ‘public  time’  and  likewise
makes it possible to define its ‘Being’.

The  Being  of  Dasein  is  care.  This  entity  exists  fallingly  as  something
that  has  been  thrown.  Abandoned  to  the  ‘world’  which  is  discovered  with
its  factical  “there”,  and  concernfully  submitted  to  it,  Dasein  awaits  its
potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world;  it  awaits  it  in  such  a  manner  that  it
‘reckons’ on and ‘reckons’ with whatever has an involvement for the sake of
this  potentiality-for-Being—an  involvement  which,  in  the  end,  is  a
distinctive  one.(1)  Everyday  circumspective  Being-in-the-world  needs  the
possibility of sight  (and this means that it needs brightness) if  it is  to  deal
concernfully  with  what  is  ready-to-hand  within  the  present-at-hand.  With
the factical disclosedness of Dasein’s world, Nature has been uncovered for
Dasein.  In  its  thrownness  Dasein  has  been  surrendered  to  the  changes  of
day and night. Day with its brightness gives it the possibility of sight; night
takes this away.

H. 413

 

Dasein awaits with circumspective concern the possibility of sight, and it
understands  itself  in  terms  of  its  daily  work;  in  thus  awaiting  and
understanding,  it  gives  its  time  with  the  ‘then,  when  it  dawns…’(2)  The
‘then’ with which Dasein concerns itself gets dated in terms of something
which  is  connected  with  getting  bright,  and  which  is  connected  with  it  in
the  closest  kind  of  environmental  involvement—namely,  the  rising  of  the
sun. “Then, when the sun rises, it is time for so and so.” Thus Dasein dates
the time which it must take, and dates it in terms of something it encounters
within the world and within the horizon of its abandonment to the world—
in terms of something encountered as having a distinctive involvement for
its  circumspective  potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world.  Concern  makes  use
of  the  ‘Being-ready-to-hand’  of  the  sun,  which  sheds  forth  light  and

warmth. The sun dates the time which is interpreted in concern. In terms of
this dating arises the ‘most natural’ measure of time—the day. And because
the temporality of that Dasein which must take its time is finite, its days are
already  numbered.  Concernful  awaiting  takes  precaution  to  define  the
‘thens’ with which it is to concern itself—that is, to divide up the day. And
the  ‘during-the-daytime’  makes  this  possible.  This  dividing-up,  in  turn,  is
done with regard to that by which time is dated—the journeying sun. Sunset
and  midday,  like  the  sunrise  itself,  are  distinctive  ‘places’  which  this
heavenly body occupies. Its regularly recurring passage is something which
Dasein,  as  thrown  into  the  world  and  giving  itself  time  temporalizingly,
takes into its reckoning. Dasein historizes from day to day by reason  of its
way  of  interpreting  time  by  dating  it—a  way  which  is  adumbrated  in  its
thrownness into the “there”. 

1.  ‘…dass  es  mit dem  und  auf  das  “rechnet”,  womit  es  umwillen  dieses  Seinkönnens  eine  am

 

Ende ausgezeichnete Bewandtnis hat.’

2. ‘…mit dem “dann, wann es tagt”…’

This  dating  of  things  in  terms  of  the  heavenly  body  which  sheds  forth
light and warmth, and in terms of its distinctive ‘places’ in the sky, is a way
of assigning time which can be done in our Being with one another ‘under
the  same  sky’,  and  which  can  be  done  for  ‘Everyman’  at  any  time  in  the
same way, so that within certain limits everyone is proximally agreed upon
it. That by which things are thus dated is available environmentally and yet
not restricted to the world of equipment with which one currently concerns
oneself. It is rather the case that in the world the environing Nature and the
public  environment  are  always  discovered  along  with  it.(ii)  This  public
dating, in which everyone assigns himself his time, is one which everyone
can ‘reckon’ on simultaneously; it uses a publicly available measure. This
dating  reckons  with  time  in  the  sense  of  a  measuring  of  time;  and  such
measuring requires something by which time is to be measured—namely, a
clock.  This  implies  that  along  with  the  temporality  of  Dasein  as  thrown,
abandoned to the ‘world’, and giving itself time, something like a ‘clock’ is
also  discovered—that  is,  something  ready-to-hand  which  in  its  regular
recurrence has become accessible in one’s making present awaitingly. The
Being  which  has  been  thrown  and  is  alongside  the  ready-to-hand  is
grounded  in  temporality.  Temporality  is  the  reason  for  the  clock.  As  the

condition for the possibility that a clock is factically necessary, temporality
is likewise the condition for its discoverability. For while the course of the
sun  is  encountered  along  with  the  discoveredness  of  entities  within-the-
world, it is only by making it present in awaitingly retaining, and by doing
so in a way which interprets itself, that dating in terms of what is ready-to-
hand environmentally in a public way is made possible and is also required.
 

ii. Cf. Section 15, H. 66 ff.

H. 414

 

Dasein  has  its  basis  in  temporality,  and  the  ‘natural’  clock  which  has
already been discovered along with Dasein’s factical thrownness furnishes
the  first  motivation  for  the  production  and  use  of  clocks  which  will  be
somewhat  more  handy;  it  also  makes  this  possible.  Indeed  it  does  this  in
such  a  manner  that  these  ‘artificial’  clocks  must  be  ‘adjusted’  to  that
‘natural’ one if the time which is primarily discoverable in the natural clock
is to be made accessible in its turn.

Before  describing  the  chief  features  in  the  development  of  time-
reckoning and the use of clocks in their existential-ontological meaning, we
must  first  characterize  more  completely  the  time  with  which  we  are
concerned  when  we  measure  it.  If  the  time  with  which  we  concern
ourselves is ‘really’ made public only when it gets measured, then if public
time is to be accessible in a way which has been phenomenally unveiled, we
must  have  access  to  it  by  following  up  the  way  in  which  that  which  has
been dated shows itself when dated in this ‘reckoning’ manner.

When the ‘then’ which interprets itself in concernful awaiting gets dated,
this  dating  includes  some  such  statement  as  “then—when  it  dawns—it  is
time  for  one’s  daily  work”.  The  time  which  is  interpreted  in  concern  is
already  understood  as  a  time  for  something.  The  current  ‘now  that  so  and
so...’ is as such either appropriate or inappropriate. Not  only  is  the  ‘now’
(and so too any mode of interpreted time) a ‘now that...’ which is essentially
datable;  but  as  such  it  has  essentially,  at  the  same  time,  the  structure  of
appropriateness or inappropriateness. Time which has been interpreted has
by  its  very  nature  the  character  of  ‘the  time  for  something’  or  ‘the  wrong
time  for  something’.(1)  When  concern  makes  present  by  awaiting  and
retaining, time is understood in relation to a “for-which”;(2) and this in turn

is ultimately tied up with a “for-the-sake-of-which” of Dasein’s potentiality-
for-Being.  With  this  “in-order-to”  relation,  the  time  which  has  been  made
public makes manifest that structure with which we have earlier(iii) become
acquainted  as  significance,  and  which  constitutes  the  worldhood  of  the
world.  As  ‘the  time  for  something’,  the  time  which  has  been  made  public
has essentially a world-character. Hence the time which makes itself public
in  the  temporalizing  of  temporality  is  what  we  designate  as  “world-time”.
And  we  designate  it  thus  not  because  it  is  present-at-hand  as  an  entity
within-the-world  (which  it  can  never  be),  but  because  it  belongs  to  the
world  [zur  Welt]  in  the  sense  which  we  have  Interpreted  existential-
ontologically.  In  the  following  pages  we  must  show  how  the  essential
relations  of  the  world-structure  (the  ‘in-order-to’,  for  example)  are
connected with public time (the ‘then, when...’, for example) by reason of
the  ecstatico-horizonal  constitution  of  temporality.  Only  now,  in  any  case,
can the time with which we concern ourselves be completely characterized
as  to  its  structure:  it  is  datable,  spanned,  and  public;  and  as  having  this
structure, it belongs to the world itself. Every ‘now’, for instance, which is
expressed  in  a  natural  everyday  manner,  has  this  kind  of  structure,  and  is
understood  as  such,  though  pre-conceptually  and  unthematically,  when
Dasein concernfully allows itself time.
 

iii. Cf. Section 18, H. 83 ff., and Section 69c, H. 364 ff.

1. ‘…den Charakter der “Zeit zu...” bzw. der “Unzeit für…’
2. ‘…ein Wozu...’ Here English idiom calls for the expression ‘for-which’ rather than ‘towards-
which’, though the latter expression has served us fairly well in similar context such as those cited in
Heidegger’s note iii below. (See also our note 1, H. 78 above.)

 

 

H. 415

The  disclosedness  of  the  natural  clock  belongs  to  the  Dasein  which
exists as thrown and falling; and in this disclosedness factical Dasein has at
the same time already given a distinctive public character to the time with
which  it  concerns  itself.  As  time-reckoning  is  perfected  and  the  use  of
clocks  becomes  more  refined,  this  making-public  gets  enhanced  and
strengthened.  We  shall  not  give  here  a  historiological  presentation  of  the
historical  evolution  of  time-reckoning  and  the  use  of  clocks,  with  all  its
possible  variations.  We  must  rather  ask  in  an  existential-ontological  way

what mode of the temporalizing of Dasein’s temporality becomes manifest
in the direction which  the  development  of  time-reckoning  and  clock-using
has  taken.  When  this  question  is  answered,  there  must  arise  a  more
primordial understanding of the fact that the measurement of time—and this
means also the explicit making-public of time as an object of concern—is
grounded  in  the  temporality  of  Dasein,  and  indeed  in  a  quite  definite
temporalizing of that temporality.

Comparison  shows  that  for  the  ‘advanced’  Dasein  the  day  and  the
presence of sunlight no longer have such a special function as they have for
the ‘primitive’ Dasein on which our analysis of ‘natural’ time-reckoning has
been  based;  for  the  ‘advanced’  Dasein  has  the  ‘advantage’  of  even  being
able to turn night into day. Similarly we no longer need to glance explicitly
and  immediately  at  the  sun  and  its  position  to  ascertain  the  time.  The
manufacture and use of measuring-equipment of one’s own permits one to
read  off  the  time  directly  by  a  clock  produced  especially  for  this  purpose.
The “what o’clock is it?” is the ‘what time is it?’ Because the clock—in the
sense of that which makes possible a public way of time-reckoning—must
be regulated by the ‘natural’ clock, even the use of clocks as equipment is
based  upon  Dasein’s  temporality,  which,  with  the  disclosedness  of  the
“there”,  first  makes  possible  a  dating  of  the  time  with  which  we  concern
ourselves; this is a fact, even if it is covered up when the time is read off.
Our  understanding  of  the  natural  clock  develops  with  the  advancing
discovery  of Nature, and  instructs  us  as  to  new  possibilities  for  a  kind  of
time-measurement  which  is  relatively  independent  of  the  day  and  of  any
explicit observation of the sky.

H. 416

 

But in a certain manner even ‘primitive’ Dasein makes itself independent
of reading off the time directly from the sky, when instead of ascertaining
the  sun’s  position  it  measures  the  shadow  cast  by  some  entity  available  at
any time. This can happen in the first instance in the simplest form of the
ancient  ‘peasant’s  clock’.  Everyman  is  constantly  accompanied  by  a
shadow;  and  in  the  shadow  the  sun  is  encountered  with  respect  to  its
changing  presence  at  different  places.  In  the  daytime,  shadows  have
different lengths which can be paced off ‘at any time’. Even if individuals
differ in the lengths of their bodies and feet, the relationship between them

remains constant within certain limits of accuracy. Thus, for example, when
one  is  concerned  with  making  an  appointment,  one  designates  the  time
publicly by saying, ‘When the shadow is so many feet long, then we shall
meet  yonder.’  Here  in  Being  with  one  another  within  the  rather  narrow
boundaries  of  an  environment  which  is  very  close  to  us,  it  is  tacitly
presupposed that the ‘locations’ at which the shadow gets paced off are at
the  same  latitude.  This  clock  is  one  which  Dasein  does  not  have  to  carry
around with it; in a certain manner Dasein itself is the clock.

The public sundial, in which the line of a shadow is counterposed to the
course  of  the  sun  and  moves  along  a  numbered  track,  needs  no  further
description. But why is it that at the position which the shadow occupies on
the  dial  we  always  find  something  like  time?  Neither  the  shadow  nor  the
divided  track  is  time  itself,  nor  is  the  spatial  relationship  between  them.
Where,  then,  is  the  time,  which  we  thus  read  off  directly  not  only  on  the
‘sundial’ but also on any pocket watch?

What  does  “reading  off  the  time”  signify?  ‘Looking  at  the  clock’  does
indeed  amount  to  more  than  observing  the  changes  in  some  item  of
equipment which is ready-to-hand, and following the positions of a pointer.
When  we  use  a  clock  in  ascertaining  what  o’clock  it  is,  we  say—whether
explicitly or not—“It is now such and such an hour and so many minutes;
now is the time for...” or “there is still time enough now until...”. Looking at
the clock is based on taking our time, and is guided by it. What has already
shown  itself  in  the  most  elementary  time-reckoning  here  becomes  plainer:
when we look at the clock and regulate ourselves according to the time, we
are essentially saying “now”. Here the “now” has in each case already been
understood  and  interpreted  in  its  full  structural  content  of  datability,
spannedness, publicness, and worldhood. This is so ‘obvious’ that we take
no note of it whatsoever; still less do we know anything about it explicitly.

H. 417

 

Saying  “now”,  however,  is  the  discursive  Articulation  of  a  making-
present which  temporalizes  itself  in  a  unity  with  a  retentive  awaiting.  The
dating  which  is  performed  when  one  uses  a  clock,  turns  out  to  be  a
distinctive way in which something present-at-hand is made present. Dating
does  not  simply  relate  to  something  present-at-hand;  this  kind  of  relating
has itself the character of measuring. Of course the number which we get by

measuring can be read off immediately. But this implies that when a stretch
is to be measured, we understand that our standard is, in a way, contained in
it;  that  is,  we  determine  the  frequency  of  its  presence  in  that  stretch.
Measuring is constituted temporally when a standard which has presence is
made present in a stretch which has presence. The idea of a standard implies
unchangingness; this means that for everyone at any time the standard, in its
stability, must be present-at-hand. When the time with which one concerns
oneself  is  dated  by  measuring,  one  interprets  it  by  looking  at  something
present-at-hand  and  making  it  present—something  which  would  not
become  accessible  as  a  standard  or  as  something  measured  except  by  our
making it present in this distinctive manner. Because the making-present of
something  having  presence  has  a  special  priority  in  dating  by  measuring,
the  measurement  in  which  one  reads  off  the  time  by  the  clock  also
expresses  itself  with  special  emphasis  in  the  “now”.  Thus  when  time  is
measured, it  is  made  public in  such  a  way  that  it  is  encountered  on  each
occasion  and  at  any  time  for  everyone  as  ‘now  and  now  and  now’.  This
time which is ‘universally’ accessible in clocks is something that we come
across as a present-at-hand multiplicity of “nows”, so to speak, though the
measuring of time is not directed thematically towards time as such.

The  temporality  of  factical  Being-in-the-world  is  what  primordially
makes the disclosure of space possible; and in each case spatial Dasein has
—out  of  a  “yonder”  which  has  been  discovered—allotted  itself  a  “here”
which is of the character of Dasein. Because of all this the time with which
Dasein concerns itself in its temporality is, as regards its datability, always
bound up with some location of that Dasein. Time itself does not get linked
to a location; but temporality is the condition for the possibility that dating
may  be  bound  up  with  the  spatially-local  in  such  a  way  that  this  may  be
binding  for  everyone  as  a  measure.  Time  does  not  first  get  coupled  with
space;  but  the  ‘space’  which  one  might  suppose  to  be  coupled  with  it,  is
encountered only on the basis of the temporality which concerns itself with
time. Inasmuch as both time-reckoning and the clock are founded upon the
temporality of  Dasein,  which  is  constitutive  for  this  entity  as  historical,  it
may  be  shown  to  what  extent,  ontologically,  the  use  of  clocks  is  itself
historical, and to what extent every clock as such ‘has a history’.(iv)
 

iv. Here we shall not go into the problem of the measurement of time as treated in the theory of
relativity.  If  the  ontological  foundations  of  such  measurement  are  to  be  clarified,  this  presupposes
that  world-time  and  within-time-ness  have  already  been  clarified  in  terms  of  Dasein’s  temporality,

and that light has also been cast on the existential-temporal Constitution of the discovery of Nature
and  the  temporal  meaning  of  measurement.  Any  axiomatic  for  the  physical  technique  of
measurement must rest upon such investigations, and can never, for its own part, tackle the problem
of time as such.

H. 418

 

The  time  which  is  made  public  by  our  measuring  it,  does  not  by  any
means turn into space because we date it in terms of spatial measurement-
relations.  Still  less  is  what  is  existential-ontologically  essential  in  the
measuring  of  time to  be  sought  in  the  fact  that  dated  ‘time’  is  determined
numerically in terms of spatial stretches  and  in  changes  in  the location of
some spatial Thing. What is ontologically decisive lies rather in the specific
kind  of  making-present  which  makes  measurement  possible.  Dating  in
terms of what is ‘spatially’ present-at-hand is so far from a spatializing of
time  that  this  supposed  spatialization  signifies  nothing  else  than  that  an
entity which is present-at-hand for everyone in every “now” is made present
in its own presence. Measuring time is essentially such that it is necessary
to say “now”; but in obtaining the measurement, we, as it were, forget what
has been measured as such, so that nothing is to be found except a number
and a stretch.

When Dasein concerns itself with time, then the less time it has to lose,
the more ‘precious’ does that time become, and the handier the clock must
be. Not only should we be able to assign the time ‘more precisely’, but the
very determining of the time should claim as little time as possible, though
it must still agree with the ways in which Others assign time.

Provisionally it was enough for us to point out the general ‘connection’
of the use of clocks with that temporality which takes its time. Just as the
concrete  analysis  of  astronomical  time-reckoning  in  its  full  development
belongs  to  the  existential-ontological  Interpretation  of  how  Nature  is
discovered, the foundations of historiological and calendrical ‘chronology’
can  be  laid  bare  only  within  the  orbit  of  the  tasks  of  analysing
historiological cognition existentially.(v)
 

v.  As  a  first  attempt  at  the  Interpretation  of  chronological  time  and  ‘historical  numeration’
[“Geschichtszahl”], cf. the author’s habilitation-lecture at Freiburg in the summer semester of 1915:
‘Der  Zeitbegriff  in  der  Geschichtswissenschaft’  (published  in  Zeitschrift  für  Philosophie  und
Philosophische Kritik, vol.  161,  1916,  pp.  173  ff.)  The  connections  between  historical  numeration,
world-time as calculated astronomically, and the temporality and historicality of Dasein need a more
extensive investigation.

Cf.  further  G.  Simmel,  ‘Das  Problem  der  historischen  Zeit’  in  Philosophische  Vorträge,
veröffentlicht  von  der  Kantgesellschaft, No.  12,  1916.  The  two  works  which  laid  the  basis  for  the
development of historiological chronology are Josephus Justus Scaliger, De emendatione temporum
(1583) and Dionysius Petavius, S. J., Opus de doctrina temporum (1627).

On  time-reckoning  in  antiquity  cf.  G.  Bilfinger,  Die  antiken  Stundenangaben  (1888)  and  Der
bürgerliche Tag. Untersuchungen über den Beginn des Kalendertages im klassischen Altertum und in
der christlichen Mittelalter (1888). See also H. Diels, Antike Technik, second edition, 1920, pp. 155-
232:  ‘Die  antike  Uhr’.  More  recent  chronology  is  handled  by  Fr.  Rühl  in  his  Chronologie  des
Mittelalters und der Neuzeit (1897).

H. 419

 

The measurement of time gives it a marked public character, so that only
in this way does what we generally call ‘the time’ become well known. In
concern every Thing has ‘its time’ attributed to it. It ‘has’ it, and, like every
entity within-the-world, it can ‘have’ it only because after all it is ‘in time’.
That time ‘wherein’ entities within-the-world are encountered, we know as
“world-time”.  By  reason  of  the  ecstatico-horizonal  constitution  of  the
temporality  which  belongs  to  it,  this  has  the  same  transcendence  as  the
world itself. With the disclosedness of the world, world-time has been made
public, so that every temporally concernful Being alongside entities within-
the-world  understands  these  entities  circumspectively  as  encountered  ‘in
time’.

The  time  ‘in  which’  the  present-at-hand  is  in  motion  or  at  rest  is  not
‘Objective’, if  what  we  mean  by  that  is  the  Being-present-at-hand-in-itself
of  entities  encountered  within-the-world.  But  just  as  little  is  time
‘subjective’, if  by  this  we  understand  Being-present-at-hand  and  occurring
in  a  ‘subject’.  World-time  is  ‘more  Objective’  than  any  possible  Object
because,  with  the  disclosedness  of  the  world,  it  already  becomes
‘Objectified’  in  an  ecstatico-horizonal  manner  as  the  condition  for  the
possibility  of  entities  within-the-world.  Thus,  contrary  to  Kant’s  opinion,
one  comes  across  world-time just  as  immediately in  the  physical  as  in  the
psychical,  and  not  just  roundabout  by  way  of  the  psychical.  ‘Time’  first
shows  itself  in  the  sky—precisely  where  one  comes  across  it  when  one
regulates  oneself  naturally  according  to  it—so  that  ‘time’  even  becomes
identified with the sky.

H. 420

 

World-time,  moreover,  is  also  ‘more  subjective’  than  any  possible
subject; for it is what first makes possible the Being of the factically existing
Self—that Being which, as is now well understood, is the meaning of care.
‘Time’ is present-at-hand neither in the ‘subject’ nor in the ‘Object’, neither
‘inside’  nor  ‘outside’;  and  it  ‘is’  ‘earlier’  than  any  subjectivity  or
Objectivity, because it presents the condition for the very possibility of this
‘earlier’. Has it then any ‘Being’? And if not, is it then a mere phantom, or
is it something that has ‘more Being’ [“seiender”] than any possible entity?
Any investigation which goes further in the direction of questions such as
these, will come up against the same ‘boundary’ which has already set itself
up to our provisional discussion of the connection between truth and Being.
(vi) In whatever way these questions may be answered in what follows—or
in whatever way they may first of all get primordially formulated—we must
first  understand  that  temporality,  as  ecstatico-horizonal,  temporalizes
something  like  world-time,  which  constitutes  a  within-time-ness  of  the
ready-to-hand  and  the  present-at-hand.  But  in  that  case  such  entities  can
never be designated as ‘temporal’ in the strict sense. Like every entity with
a character other than that of Dasein, they are non-temporal, whether they
Really occur, arise and pass away, or subsist ‘ideally’.

If  world-time  thus  belongs  to  the  temporalizing  of  temporality,  then  it
can  neither  be  volatilized  ‘subjectivistically’  nor  ‘reified’  by  a  vicious
‘Objectification’. These two possibilities can be avoided with a clear insight
—not  just  by  wavering  insecurely  between  them—only  if  we  can
understand how everyday Dasein conceives of ‘time’ theoretically in terms
of an understanding of time in the way which is closest to it, and if we can
also understand to what extent this conception of time and the prevalence of
this  concept  obstruct  the  possibility  of  our  understanding  in  terms  of
primordial time what is meant by this conception—that is, the possibility of
understanding  it  as  temporality.  The  everyday  concern  which  gives  itself
time,  finds  ‘the  time’  in  those  entities  within-the-world  which  are
encountered  ‘in  time’.  So  if  we  are  to  cast  any  light  on  the  genesis  of  the
ordinary conception of time, we must take within-time-ness as our point of
departure.
 

vi. Cf. Section 44c, H. 226 ff.

81.  Within-time-ness  and  the  Genesis  of  the  Ordinary  Conception  of

Time
 

 

H. 421

How  does  something  like  ‘time’  first  show  itself  for  everyday
circumspective  concern?  In  what  kind  of  concernful  equipment-using
dealings  does  it  become  explicitly  accessible?  If  it  has  been  made  public
with the disclosedness of the world, if it has always been already a matter of
concern  with 
the  discoveredness  of  entities  within-the-world—a
discoveredness  which  belongs  to  the  world’s  disclosedness—and  if  it  has
been  a  matter  of  such  concern  in  so  far  as  Dasein  calculates  time  in
reckoning  with itself, then  the  kind  of  behaviour  in  which  ‘one’  explicitly
regulates  oneself  according  to  time,  lies  in  the  use  of  clocks.  The
existential-temporal meaning of this turns out to be a making-present of the
travelling pointer. By following the positions of the pointer in a way which
makes present, one counts them. This making-present temporalizes itself in
the ecstatical unity of a retention which awaits. To retain the ‘on that former
occasion’  and  to  retain  it  by  making  it  present,  signifies  that  in  saying
“now” one is open for the horizon of the earlier—that is, of the “now-no-
longer”.  To  await  the  ‘then’  by  making  it  present,  means  that  in  saying
“now”  one  is  open  for  the  horizon  of  the  later—that  is,  of  the  “now-not-
yet”. Time is what shows itself in such a making-present. How then, are we
to  define  the  time  which  is  manifest  within  the  horizon  of  the
circumspective concernful clock-using in which one takes one’s time? This
time is that which is counted and which shows itself when one follows the
travelling  pointer,  counting  and  making  present  in  such  a  way  that  this
making-present temporalizes itself in an ecstatical unity with the retaining
and  awaiting  which  are  horizonally  open  according  to  the  “earlier”  and
“later”.  This,  however,  is  nothing  else  than  an  existential-ontological
interpretation of Aristotle’s definition of “time”: τοῦτο γάρ ἐστιν ὁ χρόνος,
ἀριθμὸς  κινήσεως  κατὰ  τὸ  πρότερον  καὶ  ὕστερον.  “For  this  is  time:  that
which is counted in the movement which we encounter within the horizon
of  the  earlier  and  later.”(vii)  This  definition  may  seem  strange  at  first
glance;  but  if  one  defines  the  existential-ontological  horizon  from  which
Aristotle  has  taken  it,  one  sees  that  it  is  as  ‘obvious’  as  it  at  first  seems
strange,  and  has  been  genuinely  derived.  The  source  of  the  time  which  is

thus manifest does not become a problem for Aristotle. His Interpretation of
time  moves  rather  in  the  direction  of  the  ‘natural’  way  of  understanding
Being.  Yet  because  this  very  understanding  and  the  Being  which  is  thus
understood  have  in  principle  been  made  a  problem  for  the  investigation
which  lies  before  us,  it  is  only  after  we  have  found  a  solution  for  the
question  of  Being  that  the  Aristotelian  analysis  of  time  can  be  Interpreted
thematically  in  such  a  way  that  it  may  indeed  gain  some  signification  in
principle, if the formulation of this question in ancient ontology, with all its
critical limitations, is to be appropriated in a positive manner.(viii)

Ever since Aristotle all discussions of the concept of time have clung in
principle to the Aristotelian definition; that is, in taking time as their theme,
they have taken it as it shows itself in circumspective concern. Time is what
is ‘counted’; that is to say, it is what is expressed and what we have in view,
even if unthematically, when the travelling pointer (or the shadow) is made
present. When one makes present that which is moved in its movement, one
says  ‘now  here,  now  here,  and  so  on’.  The  “nows”  are  what  get  counted.
And  these  show  themselves  ‘in  every  “now”  ’  as  “nows”  which  will
‘forthwith  be  no-longer-now’  and  “nows”  which  have  ‘just  been  not-yet-
now’.(1)  The  world-time  which  is  ‘sighted’  in  this  manner  in  the  use  of
clocks, we call the “now-time” [Jetzt-Zeit].
 

vii. Cf. Aristotle, Physica Δ 11, 219b 1 ff.
viii. Cf. Section 6, H. 19-27.

1.  ‘Und  diese  zeigen  sich  “in  jedem  Jetzt”  als  “sogleich-nicht-mehr...”  und  “eben-noch-nicht-

jetzt”.’ It is possible to read the hyphenated expressions in other ways.

 

 

H. 422

When  the  concern  which  gives  itself  time  reckons  with  time,  the  more
‘naturally’ it does so, the less it dwells at the expressed time as such; on the
contrary, it is lost in the equipment with which it concerns itself, which in
each  case  has  a  time  of  its  own.  When  concern  determines  the  time  and
assigns  it,  the  more  ‘naturally’  it  does  so—that  is,  the  less  it  is  directed
towards  treating  time  as  such  thematically—all  the  more  does  the  Being
which is alongside the object of concern (the Being which falls as it makes
present)  say  unhesitatingly  (whether  or  not  anything  is  uttered)  “now”  or
“then” or “on that former occasion”. Thus for the ordinary understanding of

time,  time  shows  itself  as  a  sequence  of  “flows”  which  are  constantly
‘present-at-hand’, simultaneously passing away and coming along. Time is
understood as a succession, as a ‘flowing stream’ of “nows”, as the ‘course
of time’. What  is  implied  by  such  an  interpretation  of  the  world-time  with
which we concern ourselves?

We get the answer if we go back to the full essential structure of world-
time and compare this with that with which the ordinary understanding of
time is acquainted. We have exhibited datability as the first essential item in
the time with which we concern ourselves. This is grounded in the ecstatical
constitution  of  temporality.  The  ‘now’  is  essentially  a  “now  that...”.  The
datable “now”, which is understood in concern even if we cannot grasp it as
such,  is  in  each  case  one  which  is  either  appropriate  or  inappropriate.
Significance  belongs  to  the  structure  of  the  “now”.  We  have  accordingly
called  the  time  with  which  we  concern  ourselves  “world-time”.  In  the
ordinary interpretations of time as a sequence of “nows”, both datability and
significance are missing. These two structures are not permitted to ‘come to
the  fore’  when  time  is  characterized  as  a  pure  succession.  The  ordinary
interpretation  of  time  covers  them  up.  When  these  are  covered  up,  the
ecstatico-horizonal  constitution  of  temporality,  in  which  the  datability  and
the  significance  of  the  “now”  are  grounded,  gets  levelled  off. The  “nows”
get shorn of these relations, as it were; and, as thus shorn, they simply range
themselves along after one another so as to make up the succession.

H. 423

 

It is no accident that world-time thus gets levelled off and covered up by
the  way  time  is  ordinarily  understood.  But  just  because  the  everyday
interpretation of time maintains itself by looking solely in the direction of
concernful common sense, and understands only what ‘shows’ itself within
the common-sense horizon, these structures must escape it. That which gets
counted  when  one  measures  time  concernfully,  the  “now”,  gets  co-
understood in one’s concern with the present-at-hand and the ready-to-hand.
Now  so  far  as  this concern  with  time  comes  back  to  the  time  itself  which
has been co-understood, and in so far as it ‘considers’ that time, it sees the
“nows” (which indeed are also somehow ‘there’) within the horizon of that
understanding-of-Being  by  which  this  concern  is  itself  constantly  guided.
(ix)  Thus  the  “nows”  are  in  a  certain  manner  co-present-at-hand:  that  is,

entities  are  encountered,  and  so  too is  the  “now”.  Although  it  is  not  said
explicitly  that  the  “nows”  are  present-at-hand  in  the  same  way  as  Things,
they still get ‘seen’ ontologically within the horizon of the idea of presence-
at-hand. The “flows” pass away, and those which have passed away make
up  the  past.  The  “nows”  come  along,  and  those  which  are  coming  along
define  the  ‘future’.  The  ordinary  interpretation  of  world-time  as  now-time
never  avails  itself  of  the  horizon  by  which  such  things  as  world,
significance,  and  datability  can  be  made  accessible.  These  structures
necessarily remain covered up, all the more so because this covering-up is
reinforced  by  the  way  in  which  the  ordinary  interpretation  develops  its
characterization of time conceptually.

The sequence of “nows” is taken as something that is somehow present-
at-hand,  for  it  even  moves  ‘i  n  t  o   time’.(1)  We  say:  ‘In every  “now”  is
now; in every “now” it is already vanishing.’ In every “now”  the  “now”  is
now  and  therefore  it  constantly  has  presence  as  something  selfsame, even
though in every “now” another may be vanishing as it comes along.(2) Yet
as  this  thing  which  changes,  it  simultaneously  shows  its  own  constant
presence. Thus even Plato, who directed his glance in this manner at time as
a sequence of “flows” arising and passing away, had to call time “the image
of  eternity”:  εἰκὼ  δ΄  ἐπενόει  κινητόν  τινα  αἰῶνος  ποιῆσαι͵  καὶ  διακοσμῶν
ἅμα  οὐρανὸν  ποιεῖ  μένοντος  αἰῶνος  ἐν  ἑνὶ  κατ΄  ἀριθμὸν  ἰοῦσαν  αἰώνιον
εἰκόνα͵ τοῦτον ὃν δὴ χρόνον ὠνομάκαμεν.(x)

The  sequence  of  “nows”  is  uninterrupted  and  has  no  gaps.  No  matter
how  ‘far’  we  proceed  in  ‘dividing  up’  the  “now”,  it  is  always  now.  The
continuity(3)  of  time  is  seen  within  the  horizon  of  something  which  is
indissolubly present-at-hand.
 

ix. Cf. Section 21, especially H. 100 ff.
x. Cf. Plato, Timaeus 37 d. [‘But he decided to make a kind of moving image of the eternal; and
while setting the heaven in order, he made an eternal image, moving according to number—an image
of that eternity which abides in oneness. It is to this image that we have given the name of “time”.’—
Tr.]
 

1. ‘...denn sie rückt selbst “in die Zeit”.’
2. ‘In jedem Jetzt  ist  das  Jetzt  Jetzt,  mithin  ständig  als Selbiges anwesend,  mag  auch  in  jedem

Jetzt je ein anderes ankommend verschwinden.’

3. ‘Stetigkeit’. In the earlier editions this appears as ‘Stätigkeit’—a spelling which we find on H.
390 f. and 398 in both earlier and later editions. It is not clear how seriously this ‘correction’ is to be
taken here; but we have  decided, with some  hesitation, to translate ‘Stätigkeit’  as ‘steadiness’, and

‘stetig’  and  ‘Stetigkeit’  as  ‘continuous’  and  ‘continuity’  respectively,  saving  ‘Continuous’  and
‘Continuity’ for ‘kontinuierlich’ and ‘Kontinuität’.

H. 424

 

When  one  takes  one’s  ontological  orientation  from  something  that  is
constantly  present-at-hand,  one  either  looks  for  the  problem  of  the
Continuity  of  time  or  one  leaves  this  impasse  alone.  In  either  case  the
specific  structure  of  world-time  must  remain  covered  up.  Together  with
datability  (which  has  an  ecstatical  foundation)  it  has  been  spanned.  The
spannedness  of  time  is  not  to  be  understood  in  terms  of  the  horizonal
stretching-along of the ecstatical unity of that temporality which has made
itself  public  in  one’s  concern  with  time.  The  fact  that  in  every  “now”,  no
matter how momentary, it is in each case already  n o w, must be conceived
in terms of something which is ‘earlier’ still and from which every  “now”
stems:  that  is  to  say,  it  must  be  conceived  in  terms  of  the  ecstatical
stretching-along  of  that  temporality  which  is  alien  to  any  Continuity  of
something present-at-hand but which, for its part, presents the condition for
the possibility of access to anything continuous(1) that is present-at-hand.

The  principal  thesis  of  the  ordinary  way  of  interpreting  time—namely,
that time is ‘infinite’—makes manifest most impressively the way in which
world-time  and  accordingly  temporality  in  general  have  been  levelled  off
and covered up by such an interpretation. It is held that time presents itself
proximally  as  an  uninterrupted  sequence  of  “flows”.  Every  “now”,
moreover,  is  already  either  a  “just-now”  or  a  “forthwith”.(2)  If  in
characterizing time we stick primarily and exclusively to such a sequence,
then  in  principle  neither  beginning  nor  end  can  be  found  in  it.  Every  last
“now”,  as  “now”,  is  always  already  a  “forthwith”  that  is  no  longer  [ein
Sofort-nicht-mehr]; thus it is time in the sense of the “no-longer-now”—in
the sense of the past. Every first “now” is a “just-now” that is not yet [ein
Soeben-noch-nicht];  thus  it  is  time  in  the  sense  of  the  “not-yet-now”—in
the sense of the ‘future’. Hence time is endless ‘on both sides’. This thesis
becomes possible only on the basis of an orientation towards a free-floating
“in-itself” of a course of “nows” which is present-at-hand—an orientation
in  which  the  full  phenomenon  of  the  “now”  has  been  covered  up  with
regard to its datability, its worldhood, its spannedness, and its character of
having a location of the same kind as Dasein’s, so that it has dwindled to an
unrecognizable  fragment.  If  one  directs  one’s  glance  towards  Being-

present-at-hand  and  not-Being-present-at-hand,  and  thus  ‘thinks’  the
sequence of “nows” through ‘to the end’, then an end can never be found.
In this way of thinking time through to the end, one must always think more
time; from this one infers that time is infinite.
 

1. ‘…Stetigen...’ The earlier editions have ‘Stätigen’.
2. ‘Jedes Jetzt ist auch schon ein Soeben bzw. Sofort.’

H. 425

 

But  wherein  are  grounded  this  levelling-off  of  world-time  and  this
covering-up of temporality? In the Being of Dasein itself, which we have,
in a preparatory manner, Interpreted as care.(xi) Thrown and falling, Dasein
is proximally and for the most part lost in that with which it concerns itself.
In  this  lostness,  however,  Dasein’s  fleeing  in  the  face  of  that  authentic
existence  which  has  been  characterized  as  “anticipatory  resoluteness”,  has
made itself known; and this is a fleeing which covers up. In this concernful
fleeing lies a fleeing in the face of death—that is, a looking-away from the
end  of  Being-in-the-world.(xii)  This  looking-away  from  it,  is  in  itself  a
mode  of  that  Being-towards-the-end  which  is  ecstatically  futural.  The
inauthentic  temporality  of  everyday  Dasein  as  it  falls,  must,  as  such  a
looking-away  from  finitude,  fail  to  recognize  authentic  futurity  and
therewith temporality in general. And if indeed the way in which Dasein is
ordinarily understood is guided by the “they”, only so can the self-forgetful
‘representation’ of the ‘infinity’ of public time be strengthened. The “they”
never dies because it cannot die; for death is in each case mine, and only in
anticipatory  resoluteness  does  it  get  authentically  understood  in  an
existentiell  manner.  Nevertheless,  the  “they”,  which  never  dies  and  which
misunderstands Being-towards-the-end, gives a characteristic interpretation
to fleeing in the face of death. To the very end ‘it always has more time’.
Here a way of “having time” in the sense that one can lose it makes itself
known.  ‘Right  now,  this!  then  that!  And  that  is  barely  over,  when…’(1)
Here  it  is  not  as  if  the  finitude  of  time  were  getting  understood;  quite  the
contrary, for concern sets out to snatch as much as possible from the time
which still keeps coming and ‘goes on’. Publicly, time is something which
everyone takes and can take. In the everyday way in which we are with one
levelled-off  sequence  of  “nows”  remains  completely
another, 

the 

unrecognizable  as  regards  its  origin  in  the  temporality  of  the  individual
Dasein. How is ‘time’ in its course to be touched even the least bit when a
man who has been present-at-hand ‘in time’ no longer exists?(2) Time goes
on,  just  as  indeed  it  already  ‘was’  when  a  man  ‘came  into  life’.  The  only
time  one  knows  is  the  public  time  which  has  been  levelled  off  and  which
belongs to everyone—and that means, to nobody.

But just as he who flees in the face of death is pursued by it even as he
evades it, and just as in turning away from it he must see it none the less,
even  the  innocuous  infinite  sequence  of  “nows”  which  simply  runs  its
course, imposes itself ‘on’ Dasein in a remarkably enigmatical way.(3)
 

xi. Cf. Section 41, H. 191 ff.
xii. Cf. Section 51, H. 252 ff.

 

1. ‘…“jetzt erst noch das, dann das, und nur noch das und dann...” ’
2.  ‘Die  nivellierte  Jetztfolge  bleibt  völlig  unkenntlich  bezüglich  ihrer  Herkunft  aus  der
Zeitlichkeit  des  einzelnen  Daseins  im  alltäglichen  Miteinander.  Wie  soll  das  auch  “die  Zeit”  im
mindesten in ihrem Gang berühren, wenn ein “in der Zeit” vorhandener 
Mensch nicht mehr existiert?’

3.  ‘…so  legt  sich  auch  die  lediglich  ablaufende,  harmlose,  unendliche  Folge  der  Jetzt  doch  in

einer merkwürdigen Rätselhaftigkeit “über” das Dasein.’

Why do we say that time passes away, when we do not say with just as
much  emphasis  that  it  arises?  Yet  with  regard  to  the  pure  sequence  of
“nows” we have as much right to say one as the other. When Dasein talks of
time’s passing away, it understands, in the end, more of time than it wants
to  admit;  that  is  to  say,  the  temporality  in  which  world-time  temporalizes
itself has not  been  completely  closed  off, no  matter  how  much  it  may  get
covered  up.  Our  talk  about  time’s  passing-away  gives  expression  to  this
‘experience’: time does not let itself be halted. This ‘experience’ in turn is
possible only because the halting of time is something that we want. Herein
lies an inauthentic awaiting of ‘moments’—an awaiting in which these are
already forgotten as they glide by. The awaiting of inauthentic  existence—
the  awaiting  which  forgets  as  it  makes  present—is  the  condition  for  the
possibility  of  the  ordinary  experience  of  time’s  passing-away.  Because
Dasein  is  futural  in  the  “ahead-of-itself”,  it  must,  in  awaiting,  understand
the  sequence  of  “nows”  as  one  which  glides  by as  it  passes  away.  Dasein
knows fugitive time in terms of its ‘fugitive’ knowledge about its death. In
the kind of talk which emphasizes time’s passing away, the finite futurity of

Dasein’s temporality  is  publicly reflected. And because  even in  talk about
time’s  passing  away,  death  can  remain  covered  up,  time  shows  itself  as  a
passing-away ‘in itself’.

H. 426

 

But  even  in  this  pure  sequence  of  “nows”  which  passes  away  in  itself,
primordial  time  still  manifests  itself  throughout  all  this  levelling  off  and
covering up. In the ordinary interpretation, the stream of time is defined as
an irreversible succession. Why cannot time be reversed? Especially if one
looks  exclusively  at  the  stream  of  “nows”,  it  is  incomprehensible  in  itself
why  this  sequence  should  not  present  itself  in  the  reverse  direction.  The
impossibility of this reversal has its basis in the way public time originates
in temporality, the temporalizing of which is primarily futural and ‘goes’ to
its end ecstatically in such a way that it ‘is’ already towards its end.

The  ordinary  way  of  characterizing  time  as  an  endless,  irreversible
sequence  of  “nows”  which  passes  away,  arises  from  the  temporality  of
falling  Dasein.  The  ordinary  representation  of  time  has  its  natural
justification.  It  belongs  to  Dasein’s  average  kind  of  Being,  and  to  that
understanding of Being which proximally prevails. Thus proximally and for
the  most  part,  even  history  gets  understood  publicly  as  happening  within-
time.(1)  This  interpretation  of  time  loses  its  exclusive  and  pre-eminent
justification only if it claims to convey the ‘true’ conception of time and to
be  able  to  prescribe  the  sole  possible  horizon  within  which  time  is  to  be
Interpreted.  On  the  contrary,  it  has  emerged  that  why  and  how  world-time
belongs  to  Dasein’s  temporality  is  intelligible  only  in  terms  of  that
temporality  and  its  temporalizing.  From  temporality  the  full  structure  of
world-time  has  been  drawn;  and  only  the  Interpretation  of  this  structure
gives us the clue for ‘seeing’ at all that in the ordinary conception of time
something has been covered up, and for estimating how much the ecstatico-
horizonal constitution of temporality has been levelled off. This orientation
by Dasein’s temporality indeed makes it possible to exhibit the origin and
the factical necessity of this levelling off and covering up, and at the same
time to test the arguments for the ordinary theses about time.
 

1. ‘Daher wird auch zunächst und zumeist die Geschichte öffentlich als inner zeitiges Geschehen

verstanden.’ The words ‘öffentlich als’ are italicized only in the later editions.

On  the  other  hand,  within  the  horizon  of  the  way  time  is  ordinarily
understood, temporality is inaccessible in the reverse direction.(1) Not only
must  the  now-time  be  oriented  primarily  by  temporality  in  the  order  of
possible  interpretation,  but  it  temporalizes  itself  only  in  the  inauthentic
temporality  of  Dasein;  so  if  one  has  regard  for  the  way  the  now-time  is
derived from temporality, one is justified in considering temporality as the
time which is primordial.
 

1.  ‘Dagegen  bleibt  umgekehrt  die  Zeitlichkeit  im  Horizont  des  vulgären  Zeitverständnisses

unzugänglich.’

H. 427

 

Ecstatico-horizonal temporality temporalizes itself primarily in terms of
the  future.  In  the  way  time  is  ordinarily  understood,  however,  the  basic
phenomenon  of  time  is  seen  in  the  “now”, and  indeed  in  that  pure  “now”
which  has  been  shorn  in  its  full  structure—that  which  they  call  the
‘Present’. One can gather from this that there is in principle no prospect that
in  terms  of  this  kind  of  “now”  one  can  clarify  the  ecstatico-horizonal
phenomenon of the moment of vision which belongs to temporality, or even
that  one  can  derive  it  thus.  Correspondingly,  the  future  as  ecstatically
understood—the datable and significant ‘then’—does not coincide with the
ordinary conception of the ‘future’ in the sense of a pure “now” which has
not yet come along but is only coming along. And the concept of the past in
the  sense  of  the  pure  “now”  which  has  passed  away,  is  just  as  far  from
coinciding  with  the  ecstatical  “having-been”—the  datable  and  significant
‘on a former occasion’. The “now” is not pregnant with the “not-yet-now”,
but  the  Present  arises  from  the  future  in  the  primordial  ecstatical  unity  of
the temporalizing of temporality.(xiii)

Although,  proximally  and  for  the  most  part,  the  ordinary  experience  of
time  is  one  that  knows  only  ‘world-time’,  it  always  gives  it  a  distinctive
relationship  to  ‘soul’  and  ‘spirit’,  even  if  this  is  still  a  far  cry  from  a
the
inquiry  oriented  explicitly  and  primarily 
philosophical 
‘subject’.  As  evidence  for  this,  two  characteristic  passages  will  suffice.
Aristotle says: εἰ  δὲ  μηδὲν  ἄλλο  πέφυκεν  ἀριθμεῖν  ἢ  ψυχὴ  καὶ  ψυχῆς  νοῦς,
ἀδύνατον εἶναι χρόνον ψυχῆς μὴ οὔσης…(xiv) And Saint Augustine writes:
“inde mihi visum est, nihil esse aliud tempus quam distentionem; sed cuius

towards 

rei  nescio;  et  mirum  si  non  ipsius  animi.”(xv)  Thus  in  principle  even  the
Interpretation  of Dasein as temporality  does not  lie beyond the  horizon of
the ordinary conception of time. And Hegel has made an explicit attempt to
set forth the way in which time as ordinarily understood is connected with
spirit. In Kant, on the other hand, while time is indeed ‘subjective’, it stands
‘beside’ the ‘I think’ and is not bound up with it.(xvi) The  grounds which
Hegel has explicitly provided for the connection between time and spirit are
well suited to elucidate indirectly the foregoing Interpretation of Dasein as
temporality and our exhibition of temporality as the source of world-time.
 

xiii. The fact that the traditional conception of “eternity” as signifying the “standing “now” (nunc
stans), has been drawn from the ordinary way of understanding time and has been defined with an
orientation towards the idea of ‘constant’ presence-at-hand, does not need to be discussed in detail. If
God’s  eternity  can  be  ‘construed’  philosophically,  then  it  may  be  understood  only  as  a  more
primordial  temporality  which  is  ‘infinite’.  Whether  the  way  afforded  by  the  via  negationis  et
eminentiae is a possible one, remains to be seen.

xiv. Aristotle, Physica Δ 14, 223 a 25; cf. ibid., 11, 218 b 29—219 a 1, 219 a 4-6. [‘But if nothing
other than the soul or the soul’s mind were naturally equipped for numbering, then if there were no
soul, time would be impossible.’—Tr.]

xv.  Augustine, Confessiones XI,  26.  [‘Hence  it  seemed  to  me  that  time  is  nothing  else  than  an
extendedness;  but  of  what  sort  of  thing  it  is  an  extendedness,  I  do  not  know;  and  it  would  be
surprising if it were not an extendedness of the soul itself.’—Tr.)

xvi.  On  the  other  hand,  the  extent  to  which  an  even  more  radical  understanding  of  time  than
Hegel’s  makes  itself  evident  in  Kant,  will  be  shown  in  the  first  division  of  the  second  part  of  this
treatise. [This portion of the work has not been published.—Tr.]

82.  A  Comparison  of  the  Existential-ontological  Connection  of
Temporality,  Dasein,  and  World-time,  with  Hegel’s  Way  of  Taking  the
Relation between Time and Spirit
 

H. 428

 

History,  which  is  essentially  the  history  of  spirit,  runs  its  course  ‘in
time’.  Thus  ‘the  development  of  history  falls  into  time’.(xvii)(1) Hegel  is
not satisfied, however, with averring that the within-time-ness of spirit is a
Fact, but seeks to understand how it is possible for  spirit to  fall  into time,
which is ‘the non-sensuous sensuous’.(xviii) Time must be able, as it were,
to  take  in  spirit.  And  spirit  in  turn  must  be  akin  to  time  and  its  essence.
Accordingly two points come up for discussion: (1) how does Hegel define
the essence of time? (2) what belongs to the essence of spirit which makes

it possible for it to ‘fall into time’? Our answer to these questions will serve
merely to elucidate our Interpretation of Dasein as temporality, and to do so
by way of a comparison. We shall make no claim to give even a relatively
full treatment of the allied problems in Hegel, especially since ‘criticizing’
him will not help us. Because Hegel’s conception of time presents the most
radical  way  in  which  the  ordinary  understanding  of  time  has  been  given
form  conceptually,  and  one  which  has  received  too  little  attention,  a
comparison of this conception with the idea of temporality which we have
expounded is one that especially suggests itself.
 

xvii.  Hegel,  Die  Vernunft  in  der  Geschichte.  Einleitung  in  die  Philosophie  der  Weltgeschichte

(ed. G. Lasson, 1917), p. 133.

xviii. Hegel, loc. cit. [This phrase (‘das unsinnliche Sinnliche’) does not occur in this section of
Hegel’s  work  as  presented  in  Lasson’s  1920  edition,  though  we  do  find:  ‘Die  Zeit  ist  dies  ganz
Abstrakte,  Sinnliches.’  And  in  the  addendum  to  Section  254  of  Hegel’s  Encyclopedia,  which
Heidegger cites in the following note, we read that space is ‘eine unsinnliche Sinnlichkeit, und eine
sinnliche Unsinnlichkeit’.—Tr.]
 

1.  ‘Also  fällt  die  Entwicklung  der  Geschichte  in  die  Zeit.’  Throughout  this  section  it  will  be
convenient to translate Hegel’s verb ‘fallen’ by ‘fall’, though elsewhere we have largely pre-empted
this  for  Heidegger’s  ‘verfallen’.  ‘Verfallen’  does  not  appear  until  H.  436,  where  we  shall  call
attention  to  it  explicitly.  (In  this  quotation,  as  in  several  others,  Heidegger  has  taken  a  few  minor
liberties with Hegel’s text, which are too trivial for any special comment.)

(a) Hegel’s Conception of Time

 

 

H. 429

When a philosophical Interpretation of time is carried out, it gets a ‘locus
in a system’; this locus may be considered as criterial for the basic way of
treating time by which such an Interpretation is guided. In the ‘physics’ of
Aristotle—that  is,  in  the  context  of  an  ontology  of  Nature—the  ordinary
way  of  understanding  time  has  received  its  first  thematically  detailed
interpretation.  ‘Time’,  ‘location’,  and  ‘movement’  stand
traditional 
together.  True  to  tradition,  Hegel’s  analysis  of  time  has  its  locus  in  the
second  part  of  his  Encyclopedia  of  the  Philosophical  Sciences,  which  is
entitled ‘Philosophy of Nature’. The first portion of this treats of mechanics,
and of this the first division is devoted to the discussion of ‘space and time’.
He calls these ‘the abstract “outside-of-one-another” ’.(xix)

Though Hegel puts space and time together, this does not happen simply
because he has arranged them superficially one after the other: space, ‘and
time also’. ‘Philosophy combats such an “also”.’ The transition from space
to time does not signify that these are treated in adjoining paragraphs; rather
‘it is space itself that makes the transition’.(1) Space ‘is’ time; that is, time
is the ‘truth’ of space.(xx) If space is thought dialectically in  that which  it
is, then according to Hegel this Being of space unveils itself as time. How
must space be thought?

Space  is  ‘the  unmediated  indifference  of  Nature’s  Being-outside-of-
itself’.(xxi)  This  is  a  way  of  saying  that  space  is  the  abstract  multiplicity
[Vielheit]  of  the  points  which  are  differentiable  in  it.(2)  Space  is  not
interrupted by these; but neither does it arise from them by way of joining
them together. Though it is differentiated by differentiable points which are
space themselves, space remains, for its part, without any differences. The
differences  themselves  are  of  the  same  character  as  that  which  they
differentiate. Nevertheless, the point, in so far as it differentiates anything in
space,  is  the  negation  of  space,  though  in  such  a  manner  that,  as  this
negation, it itself remains in space; a point is space after all. The point does
not lift itself out of space as if it were something of another character. Space
is 
the  multiplicity  of  points
[Punktmannigfaltigkeit], and it is without any differences. But it is not as if
space  were  a  point;  space  is  rather,  as  Hegel  says,  ‘punctuality’
[“Punktualität”].(xxii)  This  is  the  basis  for  the  sentence  in  which  Hegel
thinks of space in its truth—that is, as time: ‘Negativity, which relates itself
as point to space, and which develops in space its determinations as line and
surface, is, however, just as much for itself in the sphere of Being-outside-
of-itself and so are its determinations therein, though while it is positing as
in the sphere of Being-outside-of-itself, it appears indifferent as regards the
things  that  are  tranquilly  side  by  side.  As  thus  posited  for  itself;  it  is
time.’(xxiii)
 

“outside-of-one-another”  of 

the 

xix. Cf. Hegel, Encyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (ed. G. Bolland,

Leiden, 1906), Sections 254 ff. This edition also includes the ‘addenda’ from Hegel’s lectures.

xx. Op. cit., Section 257, addendum.
xxi. Ibid., Section 254. [Here Heidegger has again somewhat rearranged Hegel’s words.—Tr.]
xxii. Ibid., Section 254, addendum. [The passage reads as follows: ‘Space is thus punctuality, but

a punctuality which is null—complete Continuity.’—Tr.]

xxiii.  Cf.  Hegel,  Encyklopädie,  Hoffmeister’s  critical  edition,  1949,  Section  257.  [In  the  later
editions Heidegger quotes this passage as follows: ‘Die Negativität, die sich als Punkt auf den Raum

bezieht  und  in  ihm  ihre  Bestimmungen  als  Linie  und  Fläche  entwickelt,  ist  aber  in  der  Sphäre  des
Aussersichseins ebensowohl für sich und ihre Bestimmungen darin, aber zugleich als in der Sphäre
des Aussersichseins setzend, dabei als gleichgültig gegen das ruhige Nebeneinander erscheinend. So
für sich gesetzt, ist sie die Zeit.’ This version differs somewhat from that given in the earlier editions
of Heidegger’s work, in which this footnote does not include the reference to Hoffmeister’s edition of
the Encyclopedia. Neither version entirely matches those found in the earlier editions of Hegel, and
similar discrepancies are found in Heidegger’s other quotations from the Encyclopedia.—Tr.]
 

1. ‘…sondern “der Raum selbst geht über”.’
2. ‘…in ihm unterscheidbaren Punkte.’ We have often translated ‘unterscheiden’ as ‘distinguish’
or  ‘discriminate’,  and  ‘Unterschied’  as  ‘distinction’  or  ‘difference’,  leaving  ‘differentiate’  and
‘differentiation’ for such words as ‘differenzieren’ and ‘Differenz’, etc. In this discussion of Hegel,
however,  it  will  be  convenient  to  translate  ‘unterscheiden’  as  ‘differentiate’,  ‘Unterschied’  as
‘difference’, ‘unterscheidbar’ as ‘differentiable’, ‘unterschiedslos’ as ‘without differences’. (We shall
continue to translate ‘gleichgültig as ‘indifferent’.)

H. 430

 

If  space  gets  represented—that  is,  if  it  gets  intuited  immediately  in  the
indifferent subsistence of its differences—then the negations are, as it were,
simply given. But by such a representation, space does not get grasped in its
Being. Only in thinking is it possible for this to be done—in thinking as the
synthesis  which  has  gone  through  thesis  and  antithesis  and  transmuted
them.  Only  if  the  negations  do  not  simply  remain  subsisting  in  their
indifference  but  get  transmuted—that  is,  only  if  they  themselves  get
negated—does  space  get  thought  and  thus  grasped  in  its  Being.  In  the
negation  of  the  negation  (that  is,  of  punctuality)  the  point  posits  itself  for
itself and thus emerges from the indifference of subsisting. As that which is
posited for itself, it differentiates itself from this one and from that one: it is
no  longer  this  and  not  yet  that.  In  positing  itself  for  itself,  it  posits  the
succession in which it stands—the sphere of Being-outside-of-itself, which
is  by  now  the  sphere  of  the  negated  negation.  When  punctuality  as
indifference gets transmuted, this signifies that it no longer remains lying in
the ‘paralysed tranquillity of space’. The point ‘gives itself airs’ before all
the  other  points.(1)  According  to  Hegel,  this  negation  of  the  negation  as
punctuality is time. If this discussion has any demonstrable meaning, it can
mean nothing else than that the positing-of-itself-for-itself of every point is
a “now-here”, “now-here”, and so on. Every point ‘is’ posited for itself as a
now-point. ‘In time the point thus has actuality.’ That  through  which  each
point,  as  this  one  here,  can  posit  itself  for  itself,  is  in  each  case  a  “now”.
The “now”  is  the  condition  for  the possibility  of the  point’s positing  itself

for  itself.  This  possibility-condition  makes  up  the  Being of  the  point,  and
Being  is  the  same  as  having  been  thought.  Thus  in  each  case  the  pure
thinking  of  punctuality—that  is,  of  space—‘thinks’  the  “now”  and  the
Being-outside-of-itself of the “now”; because of this, space ‘is’ time.  How
is time itself defined?
 

1. ‘Der Punkt “spreizt sich auf” gegenüber allen anderen Punkten.’ The verb ‘spreizen’ means ‘to
spread  apart’;  but  when  used  reflexively,  as  here,  it  takes  on  the  more  specific  connotation  of
swaggering, giving oneself airs.

H. 431

 

‘Time,  as  the  negative  unity  of  Being-outside-of-itself,  is  likewise
something simply abstract, ideal. It is that Being which, in that it is, is not,
and which, in that it is not, is: it is intuited becoming. This means that those
differences  which,  to  be  sure,  are  simply  momentary,  transmuting
themselves  immediately,  are  defined  as  external,  yet  as  external  to
themselves.(xxiv)  For  this  interpretation,  time  reveals  itself  as  ‘intuited
becoming’.  According  to  Hegel  this  signifies  a  transition  from  Being  to
nothing  or  from  nothing  to  Being.(xxv)  Becoming  is  both  arising  and
passing  away.  Either  Being  ‘makes  the  transition’,  or  not-Being  does  so.
What does this mean with regard to time? The Being of time is the “now”.
Every  “now”,  however,  either  ‘now’  is-no-longer,  or  now  is-not-yet;  so  it
can be taken also as not-Being.(1) Time is ‘intuited’ becoming—that  is  to
say, it is the transition which does not get thought but which simply tenders
itself  in  the  sequence  of  “nows”.  If  the  essence  of  time  is  defined  as
‘intuited  becoming’,  then  it  becomes  manifest  that  time  is  primarily
understood in terms of the “now”, and indeed in the very manner in which
one comes across such a “now” in pure intuition.
 

xxiv. Ibid., Section 258.
xxv. Cf. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, Book I, Division I, chapter I (ed. G. Lasson, 1923), pp.

66 ff.
 

1. ‘Das Sein der Zeit ist das Jetzt; sofern aber jedes Jetzt “jetzt” auch schon nicht-mehr-bzw. je

jetzt zuvor noch-nicht-ist, kann es auch als Nichtsein gefasst werden.’

No  detailed  discussion  is  needed  to  make  plain  that  in  Hegel’s
Interpretation of time he is moving wholly in the direction of the way time

is ordinarily understood. When he characterizes time in terms of the “now”,
this presupposes that in its full structure the “now” remains levelled off and
covered up, so that it can be intuited as something present-at-hand, though
present-at-hand only ‘ideally’.

That  Hegel  Interprets  time  in  terms  of  this  primary  orientation  by  the
“now” which has been levelled off, is evidenced by the following sentences:
‘The  “now”  is  monstrously  privileged:  it  ‘is’  nothing  but  the  individual
“now”; but in giving itself airs, this thing which is so exclusive has already
been  dissolved,  diffused,  and  pulverized,  even  while  I  am  expressing
it.’(xxvi)  ‘In  Nature,  moreover,  where  time  is    n  o  w,  no  “stable”
[“bestehend”] difference between these dimensions’ (past and future) ‘ever
comes about’.(xxvii) ‘Thus in a positive sense one can say of time that only
the Present is; the “before” and “after” are not; but the concrete Present is
the result of the past and is pregnant with the future. Thus the true Present is
eternity.’(xxviii)
 

xxvi. Cf. Hegel, Encyklopädie, Section 258, addendum.
xxvii. Ibid., Section  259.  [‘  “Übrigens  kommt  es  in  der  Natur,  wo  die  Zeit  Jetzt  ist,  nicht  zum
‘bestehenden’ Unterschiede  von  jenen  Dimensionen”  (Vergangenheit  und  Zukunft).’  The  quotation
appears in a considerably less accurate form in the earlier editions of Heidegger’s work.—Tr.]

xxviii. Ibid., Section 259, addendum.

H. 432

 

If Hegel calls time ‘intuited becoming’, then neither arising nor passing
away  has  any  priority  in  time.  Nevertheless,  on  occasion  he  characterizes
time as the ‘abstraction of consuming’ [“Abstraktion des Verzehrens”]—the
most  radical  formula  for  the  way  in  which  time  is  ordinarily  experienced
and interpreted.(xxix) On the other hand, when Hegel really defines “time”,
he is consistent enough to grant no such priority to consuming and passing
away as that which the everyday way of experiencing time rightly adheres
to;  for  Hegel  can  no  more  provide  dialectical  grounds  for  such  a  priority
than he can for the ‘circumstance’ (which he has introduced as self-evident)
that the “now” turns up precisely in the way the point posits itself for itself.
So even when he characterizes time as “becoming”, Hegel understands this
“becoming” 
the
representation of the ‘stream’ of time. Thus the most appropriate expression
which the Hegelian treatment of time receives, lies in his defining it as “the

in  an  ‘abstract’  sense,  which  goes  well  beyond 

negation  of  a  negation”  (that  is,  of  punctuality).  Here  the  sequence  of
“nows” has been formalized in the most extreme sense and levelled off in
such  a  way  that  one  can  hardly  go  any  farther.(xxx)  Only  from  the
standpoint of this formal-dialectical conception of time can Hegel produce
any connection between time and spirit.
 

xxix. Ibid., Section 258, addendum. [The passage from Hegel reads as follows: ‘Time is not, as it
were, a receptacle in which everything has been put in a stream, and from which it gets swept away
and swept under. Time is only this abstraction of such consuming.’—Tr.]

xxx. The priority which Hegel has given to the “now” which has been levelled off; makes it plain
that in defining the concept of time he is under the sway of the manner in which time is ordinarily
understood; and this means that he is likewise under the sway of the traditional conception of it. It
can  even  be  shown  that  his  conception  of  time  has  been  drawn  directly  from  the  ‘physics’  of
Aristotle.

In  the  Jena  Logic  (Cf.  G.  Lasson’s  1923  edition),  which  was  projected  at  the  time  of  Hegel’s
habilitation, the analysis of time which we find in his Encyclopedia has already been developed in all
its essential parts. Even the roughest examination reveals that the section on time (pp. 202 ff.) is a
paraphrase of Aristotle’s essay on time. In the Jena Logic Hegel has already developed his view of
time  within  the  framework  of  his  philosophy  of  Nature  (p.  186),  the  first  part  of  which  is  entitled
‘System of the Sun’ (p. 195). Hegel discusses the concept of time in conjunction with defining the
concepts  of  aether  and  motion.  Here  too  his  analysis  of  space  comes  later.  Though  the  dialectic
already emerges, it does not have as yet the rigid schematic form which it will have afterward, but
still makes it possible to understand the phenomena in a fairly relaxed manner. On the way from Kant
to  Hegel’s  developed  system,  the  impact  of  the  Aristotelian  ontology  and  logic  has  again  been
decisive. The Fact of this impact has long been well known. But the kind of effect it has had, the path
it has taken, even its limitations, have hitherto been as obscure as the Fact itself has been familiar. A
concrete  philosophical  Interpretation  comparing  Hegel’s  Jena  Logic  with  the  ‘physics’  and
‘metaphysics’  of  Aristotle  will  bring  new  light.  For  the  above  considerations,  some  rough
suggestions will suffice.

Aristotle sees the essence of time in the νῦν, Hegel in the “now”. Aristotle takes the νῦν as όρος;
Hegel takes the “now” as a ‘boundary’. Aristotle understands the νῦν as στιγμή; Hegel interprets the
“now”  as  a  point.  Aristotle  describes  the  νῦν  as  τόδε  τι;  Hegel  calls  the  “now”  the  ‘absolute  this’
Aristotle follows tradition in connecting χρόνος with the σφαίρα; Hegel stresses the ‘circular course’
of time. To be sure, Hegel escapes the central tendency of the Aristotelian analysis—the tendency to
expose a foundational connection (ακολουθείν) between the νῦν, the όρος, the στιγμή, and the τόδε τι.
In its results, Bergson’s view is in accord with Hegel’s thesis that space ‘is’ time, in spite of the
very different reasons they have given. Bergson merely says the reverse: that time (temps) is  space.
Bergson’s view of time too has obviously arisen from an Interpretation of the Aristotelian essay on
time. That a treatise of Bergson with the title Quid Aristoteles de loco senserit should have appeared
at  the  same  time  as  his  Essai  sur  les  données  immédiates  de  la  conscience, where  the  problem  of
temps  and  durée  is  expounded,  is  not  just  a  superficial  literary  connection.  Having  regard  to
Aristotle’s definition of time as the αριθμός κινήσεως, Bergson prefaces his analysis of time with an
analysis  of  number.  Time  as  space  (Cf.  Essai,  p.  69)  is  quantitative  Succession.  By  a  counter-
orientation to this conception of time, duration gets described as qualitative Succession. This is not
the  place  [Ort]  for  coming  to  terms  critically  with  Bergson’s  conception  of  time  or  with  other
Present-day  views  of  it.  So  far  as  anything  essential  has  been  achieved  in  to-day’s  analyses  which
will  take  us  beyond  Aristotle  and  Kant,  it  pertains  more  to  the  way  time  is  grasped  and  to  our

‘consciousness of time’. We shall come back to this in the first and third divisions of Part Two. [The
preceding sentence has been deleted in the later editions.—Tr.]

In suggesting a direct connection between Hegel’s conception of time and Aristotle’s analysis, we
are not accusing Hegel of any ‘dependence’ on Aristotle, but are calling attention to the ontological
import which this filiation has in principle, for the Hegelian logic.

On ‘Aristotle and Hegel’, cf. Nicolai Hartmann’s paper with this title in Beiträge zur Philosophie

des deutschen Idealismus, vol. 3, 1923, pp. 1-36.

 

 

 

(b) Hegel’s Interpretation of the Connection between Time and Spirit

H. 433

If Hegel can say that when spirit gets actualized, it accords with it to fall
into  time,  with  “time”  defined  as  a  negation  of  a  negation,  how  has  spirit
itself been understood? The essence of spirit is the concept. By  this Hegel
understands  not  the  universal  which  is  intuited  in  a  genus  as  the  form  of
something  thought,  but  rather  the  form  of  the  very  thinking  which  thinks
itself: the conceiving of oneself—as the grasping of the not-I. Inasmuch as
the  grasping  of  the  not-I  presents  a  differentiation,  there  lies  in  the  pure
concept,  as  the  grasping  of  this  differentiation,  a  differentiation  of  the
difference.  Thus  Hegel  can  define  the  essence  of  the  spirit  formally  and
apophantically  as  the  negation  of  a  negation.  This  ‘absolute  negativity’
gives a logically formalized Interpretation of Descartes’ “cogito me cogitare
rem”, wherein he sees the essence of the conscientia.

The concept is accordingly a self-conceiving way in which the Self has
been conceived; as thus conceived, the Self is authentically as it can be—
that  is  free.(1)  ‘The  “I”  is  the  pure  concept  itself,  which  as  concept  has
come into Dasein.(xxxi) The “I”, however, is this initially pure unity which
relates  itself  to  itself—not  immediately,  but  in  that  it  abstracts  from  all
determinateness  and  content,  and  goes  back  to  the  freedom  of  its
unrestricted  self-equality.(xxxii)  Thus  the  “I”  is  ‘universality’,  but  it  is
‘individuality’(2) just as immediately.
 

xxxi. Cf. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, vol. II (ed. Lasson, 1923), Part 2, p. 220.
xxxii. Ibid.

1.  ‘Der  Begriff  ist  sonach  die  sich  begreifende  Begriffenheit  des  Selbst,  als  welche  das  Selbst
eigentlich ist, wie es sein kann, das heisst frei.’ The noun ‘Begriffenheit’ is of course derived from
‘begriffen’, the past participle of ‘begreifen’ (‘to conceive’ or ‘to grasp’). ‘Begriffen’, however, may

also be used when we would say that someone is ‘in the process of’ doing something. This would
suggest the alternative translation: ‘The concept is accordingly a self-conceiving activity of the Self
—an activity of such a nature that when the Self performs it, it is authentically as it can be—namely,
free.’

2. ‘ “Einzelheit” ’.We take this reading from Lasson’s edition of Hegel, which Heidegger cites.
The  older  editions  of  Heidegger’s  work  have  ‘Einzelnheit’;  the  newer  ones  have  ‘Einzenheit’.
Presumably these are both misprints.

H. 434

 

This negating of the negation is both that which is ‘absolutely restless’ in
the spirit and also its self-manifestation, which belongs to  its essence. The
‘progression’ of the spirit which actualizes itself in history, carries with it ‘a
principle  of  exclusion’.(xxxiii)  In  this  exclusion,  however,  that  which  is
excluded does not get detached from the spirit; it gets surmounted. The kind
of  making-itself-free  which  overcomes  and  at  the  same  time  tolerates,  is
characteristic of the freedom of the spirit. Thus ‘progress’ never signifies a
merely quantitative “more”, but is essentially qualitative and indeed has the
quality  of  spirit.  ‘Progression’  is  done  knowingly  and  knows  itself  in  its
goal.  In  every  step  of  its  ‘progress’  spirit  has  to  overcome  ‘itself’  “as  the
truly malignant obstacle to that goal”.(xxxiv) In its development spirit aims
‘to  reach  its  own  concept’.(xxxv)  The  development  itself  is  ‘a  hard,
unending battle against itself’.(xxxvi)

Because the restlessness with which spirit develops in bringing itself to
its  concept  is  the  negation  of  a  negation,  it  accords  with  spirit,  as  it
actualizes itself, to fall ‘into time’ as the immediate negation of a negation.
For ‘time is the concept itself, which is there [da ist] and which represents
itself  to  the  consciousness  as  an  empty  intuition;  because  of  this,  spirit
necessarily  appears  in  time,  and  it  appears  in  time  as  long  as  it  does  not
grasp its pure concept—that is, as long as time is not annulled by it. Time is
the pure Self-external, intuited, not grasped by the Self—the concept which
is  merely  intuited.’(xxxvii)  Thus  by  its  very  essence  spirit  necessarily
appears in time. ‘World-history is therefore, above all, the interpretation of
spirit in time, just as in space the idea interprets itself as Nature.’(xxxviii)
The  ‘exclusion’  which  belongs  to  the  movement  of  development  harbours
in itself a relationship to not-Being. This is time, understood in terms of the
“now” which gives itself airs.
 

xxxiii.  Cf.  Hegel,  Die  Vernunft  in  der  Geschichte.  Einleitung  in  die  Philosophe  der

Weltgeschichte (ed. G. Lasson, 1917), p. 130.

xxxiv. Ibid., p. 132.
xxxv. Ibid.
xxxvi. Ibid.
xxxvii.  Cf.  Hegel,  Phänomenologie  des  Geistes,  Werke  vol.  II,  p.  604.  [In  itahcizmg  the  word
‘time’,  we  have  followed  Heidegger’s  earlier  editions  and  the  principal  editions  of  Hegel’s  works;
these  italics  are  not  found  in  the  later  editions  of  Sein  und  Zeit.  The  italicization  of  ‘is’  has  been
introduced by Heidegger, and does not appear in the edition of Hegel which he has apparently used.
—Tr.]

xxxviii. Cf. Hegel, Die Vernunft in der Geschichte, p. 134.

H. 435

 

Time  is  ‘abstract’  negativity.  As  ‘intuited  becoming’,  it  is  the
differentiated self-differentiation which one comes across immediately; it is
the concept which ‘is there’ [“daseiende”]—but this means present-at-hand.
As something present-at-hand and thus external to spirit, time has no power
over the concept, but the concept is rather ‘the power of time’.(xxxix)

By  going  back  to  the  selfsameness  of  the  formal  structure  which  both
spirit and time possess as the negation of a negation, Hegel shows how it is
possible for spirit to be actualized historically ‘in time’. Spirit and time get
disposed  of  with  the  very  emptiest  of  formal-ontological  and  formal-
apophantical  abstractions,  and  this  makes  it  possible  to  produce  a  kinship
between them. But because time simultaneously gets conceived in the sense
of  a  world-time  which  has  been  utterly  levelled  off,  so  that  its  origin
remains  completely  concealed,  it  simply  gets  contrasted  with  spirit—
contrasted as something that is present-at-hand. Because of this, spirit must
first  of  all  fall  ‘into  time’.  It  remains  obscure  what  indeed  is  signified
ontologically  by  this  ‘falling’  or  by  the  ‘actualizing’  of  a  spirit  which  has
power  over  time  and  really  ‘is’  [“seienden”]  outside  of  it.  Just  as  Hegel
casts little light on the source of the time which has thus been levelled off,
he  leaves  totally  unexamined  the  question  of  whether  the  way  in  which
spirit is essentially constituted as the negating of a negation, is possible in
any other manner than on the basis of primordial temporality.

We  cannot  as  yet  discuss  whether  Hegel’s  Interpretation  of  time  and
spirit and the connection between them is correct and rests on foundations
which  are  ontologically  primordial.  But  the  very  fact  that  a  formal-
dialectical  ‘construction’  of  this  connection  can  be  ventured  at  all,  makes
manifest  that  these  are  primordially  akin.  Hegel’s  ‘construction’  was

prompted by his arduous struggle to conceive the ‘concretion’ of the spirit.
He makes this known in the following sentence from the concluding chapter
of his Phenomenology of the Spirit: ‘Thus time appears as the very fate and
necessity which spirit has when it is not in itself complete: the necessity of
its giving self-consciousness a richer share in consciousness, of its setting in
motion the immediacy of the “in-itself” (the  form in  which substance is  in
consciousness), or, conversely, of its realizing and making manifest the “in-
itself”  taken  as  the  inward  (and  this  is  what  first  is  inward)—that  is,  of
vindicating it for its certainty of itself.’(xl)
 

xxxix. Cf. Hegel, Encyklopädie, Section 258.
xl. Cf. Hegel, Phänomenologie des Geistes, p. 605.

H. 436

 

Our  existential  analytic  of  Dasein,  on  the  contrary,  starts  with  the
‘concretion’  of  factically  thrown  existence  itself  in  order  to  unveil
temporality  as  that  which  primordially  makes  such  existence  possible.
‘Spirit’  does  not  first  fall  into  time,  but  it  exists  as  the  primordial
temporalizing of temporality. Temporality  temporalizes world-time,  within
the  horizon  of  which  ‘history’  can  ‘appear’  as  historizing  within-time.
‘Spirit’ does not fall into time; but factical existence ‘falls’ as falling from
primordial, authentic temporality.(1) This ‘falling’ [“Fallen”], however, has
itself  its  existential  possibility  in  a  mode  of  its  temporalizing—a  mode
which belongs to temporality.
 

1. ‘Der “Geist” fällt nicht in die Zeit, sondern: die faktische Existenz “fällt” als verfallende aus
der  ursprünglichen,  eigentlichen  Zeitlichkeit.’  The  contrast  between  Hegel’s  verb  ‘fallen’  and
Heidegger’s ‘verfallen’ is obscured by our translating them both as ‘fall’. Cf. our note 1, H. 428.

83. The Existential-temporal Analytic of Dasein, and the Question of

Fundamental Ontology as to the Meaning of Being in General
 

In  our  considerations  hitherto,  our  task  has  been  to  Interpret  the
primordial  whole  of  factical  Dasein  with  regard  to  its  possibilities  of
authentic and inauthentic existing, and to do so in an existential-ontological
manner in terms of its very basis. Temporality has manifested itself as this

basis  and  accordingly  as  the  meaning  of  the  Being  of  care.  So  that  which
our  preparatory  existential  analytic  of  Dasein  contributed  before
temporality was laid bare, has now been taken back into temporality as the
primordial structure of Dasein’s totality of Being. In terms of the possible
ways in which primordial time can temporalize itself, we have provided the
‘grounds’  for  those  structures  which  were  just  ‘pointed  out’  in  our  earlier
treatment. Nevertheless, our way of exhibiting the constitution of Dasein’s
Being remains only one way which we may take. Our aim is to work out the
question of Being in general. The thematic analytic of existence, however,
first needs the light of the idea of Being in general, which must be clarified
beforehand. This holds particularly if we adhere to the principle which we
expressed  in  our  introduction  as  one  by  which  any  philosophical
investigation  may 
universal
phenomenological  ontology,  and  takes  its  departure  from  the  hermeneutic
of Dasein, which, as an analytic of existence, has made fast the guiding-line
for  all  philosophical  inquiry  at  the  point  where  it  arises  and  to  which  it
returns.”(xli) This  thesis,  of course,  is  to  be regarded not  as a dogma,  but
rather  as  a  formulation  of  a  problem  of  principle  which  still  remains
‘veiled’: can one provide ontological grounds for ontology, or does it also
require an ontical foundation? and which entity must take over the function
of poviding this foundation?
 

philosophy 

gauged: 

that 

“is 

be 

xli. Cf. Section 7, H. 38.

H. 437

 

The  distinction  between  the  Being  of  existing  Dasein  and  the  Being  of
entities,  such  as  Reality,  which  do  not  have  the  character  of  Dasein,  may
appear  very  illuminating;  but  it  is  still  only  the  point of  departure  for  the
ontological  problematic;  it  is  nothing  with  which  philosophy  may
tranquillize itself. It has long been known that ancient ontology works with
‘Thing-concepts’ and that there is a danger of ‘reifying consciousness’. But
what does this “reifying” signify? Where does it arise? Why does Being get
‘conceived’ ‘proximally’ in terms of the present-at-hand and not in terms of
the  ready-to-hand,  which  indeed  lies  closer  to  us?  Why does  this  reifying
always keep coming back to exercise its dominion? What positive structure
does the Being of ‘consciousness’ have, if reification remains inappropriate

to it? Is the ‘distinction’ between ‘consciousness’ and ‘Thing’ sufficient for
tackling  the  ontological  problematic  in  a  primordial  manner?  Do  the
answers  to  these  questions  lie  along  our  way?  And  can  we  even  seek  the
answer  as  long  as  the  question  of  the  meaning  of  Being  remains
unformulated and unclarified?

One can never carry on researches into the source and the possibility of
the  ‘idea’  of  Being  in  general  simply  by  means  of  the  ‘abstractions’  of
formal logic—that is, without any secure horizon for question and answer.
One  must  seek  a  way  of  casting  light  on  the  fundamental  question  of
ontology, and this is the way one must go. Whether this is the only way  or
even the right one at all, can be decided only after  one has gone along  it.
The conflict as to the Interpretation of Being cannot be allayed, because  it
has not yet been enkindled. And in  the  end this is  not  the  kind  of conflict
one  can  ‘bluster  into’;  it  is  of  the  kind  which  cannot  get  enkindled  unless
preparations are made for it. Towards this alone the foregoing investigation
is on the way. And where does this investigation stand?

Something  like  ‘Being’  has  been  disclosed  in  the  understanding-of-
Being which belongs to existent Dasein as a way in which it understands.
Being  has  been  disclosed  in  a  preliminary  way,  though  non-conceptually;
and  this  makes  it  possible  for  Dasein  as  existent  Being-in-the-world  to
comport itself towards entities—towards those which it encounters within-
the-world  as  well  as  towards  itself  as  existent.  How  is  this  disclosive
understanding  of  Being  at  all  possible  for  Dasein?  Can  this  question  be
answered  by  going  back  to  the  primordial  constitution-of-Being  of  that
Dasein  by  which  Being 
is  understood?  The  existential-ontological
constitution  of  Dasein’s  totality  is  grounded  in  temporality.  Hence  the
ecstatical  projection  of  Being  must  be  made  possible  by  some  primordial
way in which ecstatical temporality temporalizes. How is this mode of the
temporalizing of temporality to be Interpreted? Is there a way which leads
from  primordial  time  to  the  meaning  of  Being?  Does  time  itself  manifest
itself as the horizon of Being?

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

 

Martin Heidegger (September 26, 1889 – May 26, 1976) was a German
philosopher known for his existential and phenomenological explorations of
the “question of Being”.

His  best  known  book,  Being  and  Time,  is  considered  one  of  the  most
important  philosophical  works  of  the  20th  century.  In  it  and  later  works,
Heidegger  maintained that our way  of questioning defines our nature. But
philosophy,  Western  Civilization’s  chief  way  of  questioning,  had  in  the
process  of  philosophizing  lost  sight  of  the  being  it  sought.  Finding
ourselves  “always  already”  fallen  in  a  world  of  presuppositions,  we  lose
touch  with  what  being  was  before  its  truth  became  “muddled”.  As  a
solution  to  this  condition,  Heidegger  advocated  a  return  to  the  practical
being  in  the  world,  allowing  it  to  reveal,  or  “unconceal”  itself  as
concealment.

Writing  extensively  on  Nietzsche  in  his  later  career,  and  offering  a
“phenomenological  critique  of  Kant”  in  his  Kant  and  the  Problem  of
Metaphysics,  Heidegger  is  known  for  his  post-Kantian  philosophy.
Heidegger’s influence has been far reaching, from philosophy to theology,
deconstructionism, literary theory, architecture, and artificial intelligence.

Heidegger  is  a  controversial  figure,  largely  for  his  affiliation  with
Nazism,  for  which  he  never  apologized  nor  expressed  regret,  except  in
private  when  he  called  it  “the  biggest  stupidity  of  his  life”  (die  größte
Dummheit  seines  Lebens).  The  so-called  Heidegger  controversy  raises
general  questions  about  the  relation  between  Heidegger’s  thought  and  his
connection to National Socialism.

