THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Ways  of Life and Politics  in 

a  New  Suburban  Community 

The Levittowners 

Ways of Life and Politics 
in a New Suburban Community 


Introduction 

they lived in, driven into a  never ending round of group activity 
ruled by the strictest conformity. Suburbanites were incapable of 
real  friendships;  they were bored and lonely, alienated, atomized, 
and depersonalized. As  the myth grew,  it added yet  more disturb-
ing  elements:  the  emergence  of  a  matriarchal  family  of  domi-
neering  wives,  absent  husbands,  and  spoiled  children,  and  with 
it,  rising  marital  friction,  adultery,  divorce,  drunkenness,  and 
mental  illness.~  In  unison,  the  authors  chanted  that  individual-
ism  was  dying,  suburbanites  were  miserable,  and  the  fault  lay 
with  the  homogeneous  suburban  landscape  and  its  population. 
John  Keats,  perhaps  the  most  hysterical  of  the  mythmakers, 
began his  book as  follows:  "For literally  nothing down  ... you 
too can find a  box of your own in one of the fresh-air slums we're 
building around  the  edges  of American cities  .  .  .  inhabited by 
people whose  age  income,  number of children,  problems,  habits, 
conversation,  dress,  possessions  and  perhaps  even  blood  type  are 
also  precisely  like  yours . . . .  )They  are[  developments  con-
ceived  in  error,  nurtured  by  greed,  corroding  everything  they 
touch.  They  . . .  actually drive mad myriads of  housewives shut 
up in  them." e 

Subsequently,  literary  and  social  critics  chimed  in.  Although 
they  wrote  little  about  suburbia  per  se,  articles  and  reviews  on 
other  subjects  repeated  what  they  had  learned  from  the  mass 
media, dropping asides  that suburbia was  intellectually debilitat-
ing,  culturally  oppressive,  and  politically  dangerous,  breeding 
bland mass men without respect for  the arts or democracy. 7  They 
were  joined by architects and city planners who accused  the sub-
urbs and their builders of ruining the countryside, strangling the 
cities,  causing  urban  sprawl,  and  threatening  to  make  America 
into one vast Los Angeles by the end of the century. 8 

I  watched  the  growth  of  this  mythology  with  misgivings,  for 
my  observations  in  various  new  suburbs  persuaded  me  neither 
that  there  was  much  change  in  people  when  they  moved  to  the 
suburbs nor that  the change which  took  place could  be  traced  to 
the  new  environment.  And  if  suburban  life  was  as  undesirable 
and unhealthy as  the critics charged, the suburbanites themselves 
were  blissfully  unaware  of  it;  they  were  happy  in  their  new 
homes  and  communities,  much  happier  than  they  had  been  in 
the city.  Some of the observations about suburbia were quite ac-
curate, and  the  critics  represented  a  wide  range of  political  and 
cultural viewpoints, so  that it is  perhaps unfair to lump them all 

Introduction 

•  XXlX 

• 

together-although  I  do  so  as  a  shorthand  in  the  chapters  that 
follow.  Nevertheless,  it seemed  to me  that a  basic  inaccuracy was 
being perpetrated by those  who give American society its  picture 
of itself, and when I learned that city planners also swallowed the 
suburban  myth  and  were  altering  their  professional  recommen-
dations  accordingly,  I  felt  it  was  time  to  do  a  study  of  the  new 
suburbs.  Lacking  the  grants  to do  a  large  comparative  study  of 
several  communities  that  was-and still  is--needed,  and  leaning 
toward participant-observation by my training, I  decided the best 
way  to do the  research was  to live  in  one such community.  That 
community turned out to be Levittown, New Jersey. 

THE  SETI'ING 

When  I  first  began  to  think  about  the  study,  I  learned  that 
Levitt  and  Sons,  Inc.,  then  building  Levittown,  Pennsylvania, 
were planning to build yet another new community in the Phila-
delphia area.  The  firm  was  then,  as  now,  the  largest  builder  in 
the eastern  United States, and Levittown was  even  then a  proto-
type  of  postwar  suburbia.9  Hair raising  stories  about  the  homo-
geneity  of  people  and  conformity  of  life  in  the  first  two  Levit-
towns made it clear that if any of the evils described by the critics 
of suburbia actually existed, they would be found in a Levittown. 
Moreover,  Levitt  was  building  communities  and  not  just  sub-
divisions,  which  meant that  the entire range  of local  institutions 
and  facilities  typically associated with a  community would be es-
tablished  de  novo;  the  firm  was  offering  relatively  inexpensive 
houses,  which  meant  that  the  community  would  attract  both 
middle  and working class  people. 10 

In  I955· Levitt announced that he had purchased almost all of 
Willingboro  Township,  New  Jersey,  a  sparsely  settled  agricul-
tural  area  seventeen  miles  from  Philadelphia,  and  that  building 
would begin as  soon  as  Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  was  completed. 
The newest  Levittown was  to  be a  full-fledged  community,  with 
at least  I 2,ooo  houses,  and because Levitt had bought almost  the 
entire  township,  with  its  own  government  as  well.  Three  basic 
house  types,  costing  from  $I I,5oo  to  $I4,500  would  be  built  on 
the  same  street  and  organized  into  separate  neighborhoods  of 
about  I 200  homes,  each  served  by  an  elementary  school,  play-
ground,  and  swimming  pool.  The  complex  of  ten  or  twelve 
neighborhoods  would  be complemented  by  a  set  of community-

Introduction 

wide  facilities,  including a  large  shopping  center,  some  smaller 
oqes, and of course high schools,  a library, and parks; and some of 
these would be provided by the builder. 

On  a  sunny  Saturday  in  June  1958,  Levittown  was  officially 
opened to  potential  purchasers, and that day my wife and I  were 
among  hundreds  of  others  who  looked  over  the  houses.  Since  I 
wanted  to  be  among  the  very  first  residents,  we  selected  the 
model we  liked best,  a  four-bedroom  "Cape Cod,"  and made the 
required  down  payment  of  $100.  A  few  weeks  later,  the  first 
group of about  100 purchasers was asked to come to Levittown to 
pick a  lot,  and we  chose  one  in  the  middle  of  a  short block-to 
make  sure  that  we  would  literally  be  in  the  middle  of  things. 
During the second week of October, we  were among the first  25 
families  who  moved  into  the  new community-none of  them,  I 
was pleased to discover, coming to study it. 11 

THE  THEORY  OF  THE  STUDY 

The  study  I  ·Wanted  to  do  focused  around  three  major  but  in-
terrelated questions:  the origin of a new community,  the quality 
of suburban life, and the effect of suburbia on the behavio:rof.its 
residents. Later, I  added a  fourth question on the quality of pol-
itics and decision-making. 

My first  task was  to determine the processes which transform a 
group of strangers into a community, to see if I couldide11tify the 
essential prerequisites for "community." But I also wanted to test 
the  critics'  charge  that  the  Levittowns  were  inflicted  on  pur-
chasers  with  little  choice  of  other  housing  by  a  profit-minded 
builder  unwilling  to  provide  them  with  a  superior  home  and 
community.  Consequently,  I  intended  to  study how  the commu-
nity  was  planned:  to  what  extent  the  plans  were  shaped  by 
Levitt's  goals  and  to  what  extent  by  the  goals  of  the  expected 
purchasers.  For  this  purpose,  I  needed  also  to  study  the  pur-
chasers-why  they  were  moving  to  Levittown  and  what  aspira-
tions  they  had  for  life  in  the  new  community.  Once  they  had 
moved in,  I  wanted to  observe the community formation  process 
from  the  same  perspective:  how  much  specific  groups  were 
shaped by their founders,  how much by their members, and how 
much by the group's function for  the larger community.  I  hoped 
to know after several  years  to what extent the emerging commu-
nity reflected  the priorities of  builder, founders,  and other com-

Introduction 

•  XXX! 

• 

munity  leaders  and  to  what  extent  the  goals  for  which  people 
said they had moved to Levittown. 

These questions were grounded in a  set of theoretical issues of 
relevance  to  both  social  science  and  public  policy.  Sociologists 
have long been asking what and who bring about innovation and 
social change, and what role elite leaders and experts, on the one 
hand,  and  the  rank·and-file citizenry,  on  the  other,  play  in  this 
process.  As a  policy matter,  the same question has been raised by 
the concept of mass  society, which  implies that many features  of 
American  society-whether  television  programs,  Levittowns,  or 
Pentagon  policies-are  imposed  by  an  intentional  or  uninten-
tional conspiracy of business and governmental leaders acting on 
passive  or resigned  Americans who  actually  want something en-
tirely different. 

This issue is  of more than academic interest to makers of com-
munity  policy,  be  they  politicians  or  city  planners.  The  city 
planner  is  an  expert with  a  conception  of  the  ideal  community 
and good life, which he seeks  to translate into reality through his 
professional  activities.  If a  small  number  of  leaders  shape  the 
community, he need only proselytize them effectively to establish 
his  conception.  If the  residents  themselves  determine  the  com-
munity,  however,  he is  faced  with a  more difficult  task:  persuad-
ing  them  of  the  desirability  of  his  plans  or  somehow  changing 
their  behavior  to  accord  with  them.  The further and normative 
issue  is  even  more  perplexing:  whose  values  should  shape  the 
new community, the residents' or the planner's? 12 

The second question of  the study sought to  test  the validity of 
the  suburban  critique,  whether  suburban  ways  of  life  were  as 
undesirable  as  had  been  claimed.  Are  people  status-seekers,  do 
they engage in a  hyperactive social  life  which  they  do not really 
enjoy,  do  they  conform  unwillingly  to  the  demands  of  their 
neighbors,  is  the  community a  dull  microcosm  of  mass  society? 
Are  the women  bored and lonely matriarchs, and does  suburban 
life produce the malaise and mental  illness which  the critics pre-
dicted?  And  if  not,  what  dissatisfactions  and  problems  do  de-
velop? 

The  third  question  followed  logically  from  the  second:  were 
undesirable  changes  (and  desirable  ones  too)  an  effect  ofthe 
move  from  city  to  suburb  or  of  causes  unrelated  to  either  the 
move  or  suburbia?  My  previous  observations  led  me  to  suspect 
that the changes were less  a  result of suburban residence than of 

•  XXXll 

• 

Introduction 

aspirations  for  individual  and  family  life  which  enco!JJ'(l_ged 
people to move  to the suburbs in the first  place.  Consequently, I 
wanted  to  discover  whether  the  changes  people  rePQ!!_~ after 
coming to Levittown were intended, planned by them before the 
move,  or  unintended,  encouraged or forced  on  them afterwards 
by  the  community.  If unintended changes outweighed  intended 
ones,  the_community  probably  had  significant effects  on J~ resi-
dents.  And if so,  what sources  and agents within  the community 
created them-the physical environment of suburbia, the distance 
from  urban  facilities,  the  social  structure  and  the  people  who 
made  it,  andjor the  builder or organizational  founder? 

The  theoretical  issue  about  the  impact of  the community has 
long  been  debated  within  sociology,  the  ecologists  arguing  that 
the local  economy and geography shape the behavior of the com-
munity's  residents;  the  cultural  sociologists  suggesting- ihat  the 
c~mmunity and  its residents'  behavior are  largely a  reflection  of 
regional  and  national social  structures.18  The policy issue  is  re-
lated  to  the  previous  one.  If there  is  no change  in  people's  be-
havior when they move  to the suburbs,  then public policy which 
alters only the community, such as city planning, may be ineffec-
tive.  The same is  true if changes are mainly intended. If they are 
mainly unintended, however, and  the community has  impact on 
people's  lives,  then  policy  to  change  the  community  will  also 
change  their lives.  And  if the sources of change can be traced  to 
the  physical  environment,  the  city  planner's concern  with  alter-
ing that ehironment is justified;  if they lie in the social environ-
ment,  then  social  planning  would  be  more  effective.  But  if  in-
tended changes  predominate,  public  policy would  have  to affect 
the  aspirations  with  which  people  come  to  the  community and 
the more fundamental sources of these aspirations.  Of course, all 
this assumes  that policy change is  needed,  which requires a  prior 
determination of what is  harmful or in need of improvement in 
suburban life. 

As part of my study of the quality of life, I  had intended to re-
search  political  life as  well,  and as  part of the  inquiry into orig-
ins,  to find  out how much attention elected officials  paid to feed-
back from the: voters-whether the body politic was being created 
by  political  leaders  on  their  own  or  in  response  to  resident  de-
mands.  In  the  course  of  my  research  I  became  aware  of  what 
should have been obvious all along:  that the community was also 
being shaped  by  the decisions  of its  governing body,  and that  I 

Introduction 

•  XXXlll 

• 

needed  to  study who  was  making  them  and  how,  and  to  deter-
mine what role  the planner and other kinds of experts played in 
the  decision-making  process.  I  wanted  particularly  to  find  out 
how  much  leeway  the  decision-makers  had  for  unpopular  deci-
sions,  especially those  termed "in the public interest"  by experts 
and  planners.  Underlying  the  empirical  question  was  another 
normative  one:  whether  government  should  be  responsive  and 
democratic,  and  when  it  should  make  unpopular  decisions  to 
preserve  the  public  interest  as  well  as  the  rights  of  powerless 
minorities. 

All  four questions  ultimately boil down  to a  single one about 
the process of change and the possibility of innovation in a social 
system.  They all  ask  how  change can  be brought about, whether 
the major initiators are the leaders or the led,  and what role the 
planner or any other expert policy-maker can play.  And they also 
ask,  normatively  speaking,  what  changes  are  desirable,  partic-
ularly when they conflict with the actions or wishes of the major-
ity  of residents.  These  questions  are,  of course,  relevant  to  any 
community, but they are raised more easily in a new cemmunity, 
where all  social  and  political  processes can  be  traced from  their 
very beginning. 

I  should note that when I  began my research, I  had not formu-
lated the questions as  clearly or compactly as  they are  here writ-
ten, and I  had no intention of limiting myself only to them.  One 
of the major pleasures of participant-observation is to come upon 
unexpected new topics of study, and these are reflected in the oc-
casional  tangential analyses  that occur throughout the book. 

THE  METIIODS  OF  THE  STUDY 

The main  source  of data  was  to  be  participant-observation.  By 
living in the community for  the first  two years,  I  planned to ob-
serve the development of neighbor relations and social life and to 
be on  hand  when  organizations  and  institutions  were  being set 
up.  In addition to observing at public meetings,  I  would also  be 
able to interview founders and members, and once having gotten 
to  know  them,  follow  their  groups  as  they  went  through  their 
birth  pains.  Meanwhile  I  would  do  much  the  same  with 
churches,  governmental  public  bodies,  and  political  parties;  I 
would talk to doctors,  lawyers,  local  reporters, and  the Levitt ex-
ecutives,  as  well.  Eventually  I  would get  to  know  all  the  impor-

•  XXXIV 

• 

Introduction 

tant  people  and  a  sizeable  sample  of  other  residents,  and  inter-
view  them from  time to time as  the community building process 
unfolded.  The  nature  of  everyday  life  I  would  discover  princi-
pally on my own street, where I  could observe my neighbors and 
myself  in  our  roles  as  homeowners  and  block  residents.  These 
plans came  to fruition,  and  I  spent  most  of my  days  making the 
rounds of the community to find  out what was  happening, much 
like  a  reporter.  For a  year  after  organizations  first  sprang up,  I 
went to at least one meeting every week night. 

Although  observation  would  also  provide  some  data  on  the 
community's effects on people, and on their feelings  about Levit-
town  and  their  problems,  it  would  not  allow  me  to  contact  a 
large and random enough sample.  Consequently, I  planned to in-
terview such a sample shortly before moving in,  to find  out what 
aspirations  they were bringing to  the community, and again  two 
years  later,  to determine what intended and unintended changes 
had  occurred  in  their  lives.  The  shortage  of  funds  made  the 
sample  smaller  than  I  had  wished,  but  forty-five  respondents 
were  interviewed  twice,  mainly  by  graduate  students  from  the 
University  of  Pennsylvania.  As  the  sample  included  too  few 
former  city  dwellers  for  even  a  rudimentary  statistical  analysis, 
fifty-five  ex-Philadelphians  were  interviewed  as  well,  but  only 
once.  And  being unable  to  persuade  the  builder to give  me  the 
names of purchasers before they moved  in,  I  had to schedule the 
initial  interview  with  the  first  sample  shortly  after  they  ar-
rived.14  The  builder  did,  however,  send  out  a  prearrival  mail 
questionnaire  for  me,  which  ultimately went  to  3100  purchasers 
(a  record-breaking  two  thirds  of  whom  filled  it  out),  and  pro-
vided  much  of  the  data  on  the  Levittowners,  their  moving 
reasons, and aspirations reported in Chapter Two.u Whenever I 
report statistical  findings  about people's  behavior,  the data come 
from  the mail questionnaire  (particularly in Chapter Two), and 
from  the  interviews  (particularly  in Part  Two).  Further  details 
about  the questions  themselves  and  about  the limitations of  the 
mail  questionnaire,  interview,  and  participant-observation  find-
ings  will  be  found  in  appropriate  places  in  the  text  and  in  the 
Appe·  -:lix. 

My  previous  participant-observation  research  had  convinced 
me that my role in Levittown would be more an observer's  than 
a  participant's.  Participating is  undoubtedly the best way  to dis-
cover what is  really going on, but becoming a  participant in one 

I ntroducticm 
group automatically  excludes  the  researcher  from  learning  any-
thing  about  what  is  going  on  in  competing  or  opposing  ones. 
Consequently,  I  decided  I  would  participate  only  in  the  life  of 
my  own  block  and  as  a  member of  the  public at meetings,  but 
that otherwise my role would be that of an.observer and informal 
interviewer. 

•  XXXV 

• 

As soon as  I  moved in,  I  told people I  was on the faculty of the 
University  of  Pennsylvania  and  that  I  would  do  a  study  of  the 
community  formation  process  in  Levittown.  Having  learned 
from  previous  experience  that  it is  difficult  to  explain sociology 
meaningfully to  people,  I  usually described my research  as  a  his-
torical study.  I did not go into detail about it-I was rarely asked 
to-and  I  did  not  tell  people  on  my  block  that  I  was  keeping 
notes  on  their  (and  my)  activities  as  homeowners  and  neigh-
bors.  To have done so would have made life unpleasant for them 
and for me.  I  disclaimed association with  the mail questionnaire 
or  the  interviews  on  behavior  change,  fearing  (probably  un· 
necessarily)  that  I  might  be  rejected  as  a  participant-observer. 
Finally I  did not  tell  people  I  had moved  to Levittown in order 
to  do  the  study.  Actually,  it  would  not  have  occurred  to  them 
that  I  was  not simply interested  in a  good  low-priced  house  and 
the chance to enjoy suburban living. 

Aside  from  these  deceptions,  being a  participant-observer  was 
almost  always  enjoyable  and  often  exciting.  I  liked  most  of  the 
people  I  met  and  had  no  trouble  in  getting  information  from 
them.  Identifying  myself  as  a  researcher  did  not  inhibit  them 
from  talking,  but  then  I  asked  few  personal  questions;  being as 
curious as  I  about the evolution of a  new community,  they were 
willing  and  often  eager  to  have  me  sit  in  at  meetings  or  inter-
view  them.  After a  while,  I  became a  fixture  in the community; 
people forgot  I  was  there and went on with  their business,  even 
at  private  political  gatherings.  I  was  always  welcomed  at  public 
meetings,  especially  when  citizen  attendance  was  low.  Needing 
an audience,  public officials  were  glad  to  forget  I  was  there  as  a 
researcher.  Indeed,  I  was  once publicly  praised  for  my steady at-
tendance. 

Most people enjoy being studied;  it means  they are  important 
and it flatters  them. Since I was always collecting information but 
never  published  anything,  however,  people  could  not  check  on 
me as  they can on a  reporter, and some of the politicians became 
suspicious  of  what  I  would  eventually  write.  "Will  it  be  like 

•  XXXVI 

• 

Introduction 

Peyton  Place?"  a  couple  of  them  once  asked  jokingly.  I  wise-
cracked back  that I  would be glad to include similar material on 
local  incest if they could provide the data, but realizing that their 
jokes hid  some concern about  my publishing  political  and other 
community intrigues, I  made it clear that I  would not use names 
in the book. 

I  tried not to act like a  formal  researcher and rarely took notes 
during  the  thousands  of  informal  conversational  interviews.  In-
stead  I  memorized  the  answers,  made  quick  notes  as  soon  as  I 
could, and later wrote the whole interview in my field diary.  (Al-
though a famous novelist has recently garnered considerable pub-
licity for  memorizing his  interviews,  this  has  long been standard 
practice  for  many  sociologists.)  Social  occasions  were  a  fruitful 
source of data about community attitudes,  but I  was always care-
ful  not  to ask  too  many questions  or questions  inappropriate  to 
the  neighborly role.  I  recall  feeling  frustrated  about  this  at one 
social gathering, only to hear a  neighbor ask exactly the questions 
I  felt  I could not ask.  This made me wonder about the similarity 
between sociology and  gossip,  but  then  she  was  the block's  nosy 
neighbor.  Actually,  in  life  on  the  block  I  often acted  spontane-
ously as  a  neighbor,  and only after  I  got  horne  would  I  become 
the  researcher  again,  writing  down  my  and  my  neighbors'  con-
versations and activities. 

The main problem in being a participant-observer is not to get 
people  to  give  information,  but  to  live  with  the  role  day  after 
day.  As  a  researcher,  I  could not afford to alienate any present or 
potential  sources,  or become  identified  with any single group or 
clique in the community. Consequently,  I  had to be neutral, not 
offering opinions on controversial local  issues  or on national  pol-
itics if they  were  too different from  prevailing opinions--as  they 
often were.  Even  in social  situations,  I  could never  be quite my-
self, and I  had to be careful not to take a dominant role. The life 
of  the  party  makes  a  poor  participant-observer,  but  being  shy 
anyway,  I  did  not  have  to  pretend.  I  also  had  to  restrain  the 
normal temptation to avoid people I did not like, for had I given 
in, my sample would have  been  biased and my conclusions inac-
curate.  The participant-observer must talk  to a  fairly representa-
tive  cross  section  of  the  population.  I  had  to  be  sure  not  to  act 
like  a  professor,  for  fear  of  losing  access  to  people  who  feel 
threatened  by  academic  degrees  or  by  their  own  lack  of educa-
tion. This was not too difficult, for  I  am not entirely comfortable 

Introduction 

•  XXXVll 

• 

in  a  professorial  role  anyway.  And  having  enough  interest  in 
small  talk  about  sports,  sex,  automobiles,  weather,  and  other 
staples of  male conversation,  I  had  no difficulty  in  participating 
in the regular evening and Saturday morning bull sessions on the 
front lawn.  Relaxed conversation with women was  more difficult, 
except  in  a  group  of couples,  and  observing  women's  meetings 
was  out of the question.  Perhaps they would have let me  in,  but 
we  would  all  have  been  uncomfortable.  However,  wo91en  en-
joyed  being  interviewed-they  liked  having  their  h6usework 
interrupted-and I could always go to see anyone I wished to find 
out what happened at their meetings. 

A  participant-observer  is  much  like  a  politician,  for  he  must 
always  watch  his  words  and  his  behavior,  think  about  the  next 
question  to  ask,  and  plan  strategy  for  studying  a  prospective 
event.  There was  anxiety  too,  about  figuring  out what  to  study 
and  what  not  to  study,  and  particularly  about  the  possibility  of 
missing  something important that  could  not  be  retrieved  in  the 
rapid flow  of events.  I also felt guilty sometimes about not telling 
people why  I  was asking questions and about the deceptions that 
inevitably  accompany  the  research  role,  but  I  felt  secure  in  the 
knowledge  that none of the information  so  gathered would  ever 
be  used  against  anyone. 

Yet even  the strain of playing a  role  that inhibits one's person-
ality is  more  than matched  by  the  excitement of doing research, 
watching  society  from  close  up,  seeing  the  textbook  social  proc-
esses  in  operation,  and  constantly  getting  ideas  about  social 
theory  from  what  people  say and  do.  There  was  enjoyment  in 
meeting many hundreds of people, and above all,  in being in the 
middle of and in on things.  Often, I  felt I  was watching dozens of 
continuing  serials,  some  pitting  heroes  against  villains,  others 
with temporary cliff-hanger endings,  but all  of  them stimulating 
my  curiosity  as  to  how  they  would  come  out.  And  before  one 
serial  was  over,  several  others  were  sure  to  have  begun.  This  is 
why  I  could  never  answer  properly  when  city  people  asked  me 
whether I  really  enjoyed living in Levittown.  I  did enjoy it,  but 
as  a  researcher,  I  was  not a  normal  resident.  Had  I  been  one,  I 
would  have  enjoyed  the  many  opportunities  for  community  ac-
tivity which came my  way  (partly  because of my training  in city 
planning)-all of which I  had to turn down as  a  researcher-but 
sometimes I found the community personally unsatisfying because 
of  the  shortage  of  people  and  facilities  to  meet  my  own  intel-

•  XXXT!lll 

• 

Introduction 

lectual  and  cultural  needs.  Even  so,  I  would  not  judge  Levit-
town,  or any community,  negatively simply  because  it could not 
fully satisfy my personal needs. 

Studying the quality of life  implies evaluation,  and this means 
personal  value  judgments.  I  was  guided  by  at  least  three.  First 
and  foremost,  my  evaluation  reflects  the  standards  of  the  resi-
dents themselves, for I  begin with the judgment that, more often 
than not,  they  are  the  best authority of  the quality of  their  own 
life.  In  a  pluralistic  society,  there  is  no  single  standard  for  the 
good  life,  and  in  a  democratic  one,  people  have  the right  to  set 
their  own.  For  example,  if  Levittowners  report  that  they  find 
their community satisfying.  as  they do,  their opinion ought to  be 
respected. Although the suburban critics insist  that these satisfac-
tions are spurious and self-deceptive, they offer no valid evidence, 
so  that  their  charge  only  indicates  their  differing  standards  for 
the  good  life.  Of course,  if  the  Levittowners'  statements  include 
latent  suggestions  of  dissatisfaction,  something  is  clearly  wrong. 
Implicit in this value judgment is  a second which goes  beyond 
the  dictates  of  pluralism  and  democracy.  Specifically,  I  believe 
that  there  are  an  infinite  number  of  ways  of  living well  and of 
coping with  problems, all  of them valid unless they hurt the peo-
ple  practicing  them  or  others.  Our  society  generates  too  much 
social  criticism  consisting  essentially  of  complaints  that  people 
are not  behaving as  the critics  would  like  or themselves  behave. 
Without  proof  that  certain  behavior  is  pathological  for  indi-
vidual  or society,  such criticism can  be rejected for  what it is,  an 
objection to diversity and pluralism. 

But it would be foolhardy  to base an evaluation solely on what 
people  say,  for  if  sociology  has  discovered  anything,  it  is  that 
often people do not know all they are doing or what is happening 
to  them. The observer always  sees  more than anyone else,  if only 
because that is  his job, but if he evaluates what he alone sees,  he 
must still do so by the standards of the people whom he is observ-
ing.  Of course,  here and there I  make personal  judgments which 
do not practice what I  have just preached and which reject one or 
another of  the  Levittowners'  standards.  At  the conscious level,  I 
have  limited  myself  to  those  judgments  which  I  consider  of 
higher  importance  than  the  Levittowners'  standards-including 
the  practice  of  democracy-but  unconscious  judgments  surely 
creep  in  too.  One cannot  live  intimately  with  a  community for 
several  years  without  making  them,  and  I  only  regret  not  being 
aware of those that might bias the study unduly. 

Introduction 

•  XXXIX 

• 

In  later chapters,  I  also  make a  number of recommendations. 
Most are not spectacular, for although I  can be as  radical as any-
one  else,  I  feel  that  proposals  which  run  totally  counter  to  the 
standards  of  the  people  who  are  asked  to  implement  them  and 
which  have  little  chance  of  implementation  in  the  foreseeable 
future are utopian  in the negative sense.  Being radical can some-
times be a  conformist ploy  to maintain one's social  standing and 
self-image  in radical circles.  Most of the proposals relate to Levit-
town  as  it  existed  during  the  time  of  my  fieldwork,  and  should 
not  be  taken  as  recommendations for  today,  unless  a  restudy  in-
dicates  (as  it  probably  would)  that  the  community  has  not 
changed significantly since the beginning of the decade. Finally, I 
have  tried to  keep analysis and evaluation separate,  because I  be-
lieve  that  the  former  is  more  than  a  rationalization  or  elabora-
tion  of  my  value  judgments;  most  of  my  findings  would  have 
been  reached  by  another  social  scientist  starting  from  different 
value judgments.  Obviously,  the analysis is objective only in rela-
tion  to  the  methods  and  concepts  I  have  used  and  to  the  judg-
ments which determined  them,  but  in  that  sense,  I  believe  it  is 
objective. 

The  book  tells,  then,  what  I  learned  during  the  two  years  I 
lived  in  Levittown  (October  1958-September  1g6o),  in  the  year 
I  did  additional  fieldwork  without  living  there  (September 
1g6o-june  1961),  and  in  the  years  covered  by  the  effects  inter-
views  (1g6o-Ig62).  Wherever  possible,  I  have  used  newspaper 
articles and data from  Levittown informants to report important 
events that have occurred since then. 

NOTES 

1.  The articles appeared originally in Fortune in 1953, and in Whyte 
(1956), Part Ill. For full citation of works referred  to in  the  notes 
by  author's  name  only,  see  References,  pages  452-462.  Where 
several  works  by  the  same  author are  cited,  the  note  reference  is 
followed  by  the  appropriate  publication  dare. 

2.  Among  the  principal  contributors  to  the  popular  image  of  s).lb-
urbia were a 1950 novel  by Charles Mergendahl, It's Only  Tempo-
rary  (perhaps  the first of  the  flood  of fiction  and nonfiction  about 
the  suburbs)  and  Henderson,  Allen,  Burton,  Spectorsky,  Keats, 
ami more  recently,  Wyden.  A  Sunday supplement,  Suburbia  To-
day,  was  filled  with articles  about  suburbia,  pro  and  con. 

ll·  There  were  dramatic  novels,  mostly  about  upper  middle  class 

•  xi  • 

Introduction 

suburbs, like Otis Carney's How  the Bough Breaks; melodramatic 
ones  like John McPartland's No Down  Payment,  later made into 
a  movie;  and  humorous  ones like  Mergendahl's;  plays,  for  exam-
ple, Man in the Dog Suit; and even an opera, Leonard Bernstein's 
Trouble  in  Tahiti.  Levittown  was  often  the  site,  by  implication 
in  Mergendahl's  book,  and  explicitly  in  a  half-hour  television 
comedy  series,  (never  produced)  called  The  Man  Who  Came  to 
Levittown.  While  most  of  today's  television  situation  comedies 
are set in the suburbs,  they  are  not so identified and do not  deal 
with problems  they describe  as  suburban. 

4·  Berger  (1g6o),  Chap.  1.  For other analyses of  the  popular image 
of suburbia, see Strauss, Chaps.  10 and u; Dobriner (1968), Chap. 
1;  Riesman  (1964);  and  Berger  (1966). 

5·  On mental illness see James, and a full-length study which became 
a  best-seller, by Gordon, Gordon, and Gunther. The myth of sub-
urban  adultery,  which  can  probably  be  traced  to  century-old 
novels  about  upper  and  upper  middle  class  unfaithfulness,  has 
spawned a  flood  of strenuously erotic paperbacks which still keep 
coming, although the output of other suburban literature has now 
abated.  See  e.g.,  John  Conway's  Love  in  Suburbia,  subtitled 
"They  Spiced  Their  Lives  with  Other  Men's  Wives,"  or  Dean 
McCoy's  The  Development,  advertised  as  "a biting  novel  which 
strips  bare  the  flimsy  fa~ade  of  decency  concealing  unbridled 
sensual  desires  of  America's sprawling Suburbia." 

6.  Keats  (1957),  p. 7· 
7·  Although  most  sociologists  doubted  the  myth,  some  accepted 
parts  of  it,  e.g.,  Gruenberg,  Duhl,  Riesman  (1957),  and  Stein, 
Chaps. 9 and 12. Interestingly enough, "serious" novelists have not 
written  about  suburbia.  George  Elliott's  Parktilden  Village  and 
Bruce Jay Friedman's Stem  are set in suburban  housing  projects 
and  reflect  the  suburban  myth,  but  deal  even  less  with  repre-
sentative  and recognizable  suburbanites  than  the  popular  novel-
ists. 

8.  For example,  Mumford,  Chap.  16;  Blake;  and  Gruen,  Chap.  5· 
9·  Actually,  most  of  the  suburban  building  had  taken  the  form  of 
subdivisions on the fringe of established communities rather  than 
new communities,  so  that Levittown  was  in  many  ways  atypical. 
It was  a  prototype  largely  because  it had  become  the  symbol  of 
modem  suburbia  among  the  critics,  journalists,  novelists,  and 
moviemakers concerned with  the subject. 

10.  My  study was  formulated  in  the affluent society  of  the mid-1950s 
and I  was then especially interested in wheth~r (and how) working 
class  people  were  acculturating  to  middle  clasa  life  styles.  If the 
move from city to suburb created major changes in people's lives, 
I  thought  they  would  be  most  apparent  among  working  class 
people moving to a middle class  suburb and could  best be atudied 
there,  provided  one could  distinguish  between  change• resulting 
from  social mobility and changes resulting from  the move.  There 
were  too few  working class  Levittownen  to  limit my  research  to 

Introduction 

•  xli  • 

them, but some  years later, Berger  (1960)  studied a  working class 
suburb, covering many of the topics in which I  was interested. 
11.  Later,  I  would have welcomed sharing my  task with other partic-
ipant-observers,  but  at  that  time,  I  was  unsure  about  people's 
feelings toward a  resident researcher and  thought that more  than 
one  sociologist  in  the  community  would  make  the  research  too 
visible.  I  was  wrong,  because  the  community  was  large  enough 
and  the  neighborhoods  separate  enough,  and  because  after  a 
while the researcher became part of the daily scene and faded into 
invisibility. 

12.  This question was also  evoked by a  study I  had just participated 
in: on the issue of whether municipal services ought to be planned 
according  to  the priorities  of those  who  supplied  them  (the  pro-
fessional  educators,  recreationists,  public  health  officials,  and 
social  workers),  or  of  those  who  used  them  (their  "clients"): My 
own research,  which dealt with public recreation, concluded that 
parks  and  playgrounds  ought  to  be planned  for  their  users,  and 
undoubtedly  left  an  a  priori  bias  in studying  the  larger  issue  in 
Levittown. 

13.  See,  e.g.,  Duncan and Schnore. 
14.  The builder was my only source of purchasers' names,  but he had 
a  policy of not giving  them  out to discourage  milk  salesmen  and 
other  merchants  from  bothering  people  before  they  moved  in. 
The  firm  also  had  little  interest  in  research,  and  some  officials 
feared  that  several  purchasers  might  change  their  minds  about 
buying if I interviewed them about  it. Consequently, I  had  to ask 
people  to  recall  the  aspirations  with  which  they  came,  but  they 
mentioned  the  same  ones  which  appeared  in  the  mail  question· 
naire  that was  filled  out before  arrival  in Levittown. 

15.  The questionnaire was  on  University  of Pennsylvania  stationery, 
and answered  ones  were  to  be  returned  to  the  campus,  thus  al-
leviating any  suspicion  that it was  a  Levitt  research  project. 

DDDDDD 
DDDDDD 

Part 1 •  THE  ORIGIN  OF 
A  COMMUNITY 

DDDDDD 

D 

Chapter One 

THE  PLANNERS  OF 
LEVITTOWN 

D 

D 

D 

IN  ORDER  TO  DESCRiBE  LEVITTOWN'S  ORIGIN,  ONE  MUST  BEGIN  WITH 
its planners: who made the critical decisions for the conception of 
the community, with what  goals  in mind,  and  for  what  kinds  of 
residents and aspirations? The most important role was,  of course, 
played  by  the  builder,  Levitt  and  Sons.  The  firm  was  founded 
during the Depression by  the late Abraham Levitt, a  "self-made" 
son  of  Russian-Jewish  immigrants  who  had  practiced real  estate 
law  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  before  going  into  the  building 
business, and by  his two sons,  William and the late Alfred.  Until 
the beginning of World War II, the firm  built a number of small 
suburban  subdivisions  on  Long  Island,  priced  to  appeal  to  the 
upper  middle  class  then  streaming  to  the  Island.  After  World 
War II, as  a result of experience gained in building Navy housing, 
the  Levitts  developed  a  mass  production  scheme  that  allowed 
them  to  build  inexpensive  housing  for  the  postwar flood  of vet· 
erans and their families. 1 

Most of  the concepts that went into planning Levittown,  New 
Jersey,  were  evolved  in the two earlier Levittowns,  in New York 
and  Pennsylvania.  Levittown,  Long  Island,  begun  in  1947,  was 
built  in  traditional  subdivision  style,  with  the  builder  buying a 
piece  of  land-much  larger  than  most  others,  to  be  sure-and 
then acquiring further acreage as sales continued to go well.  The 
houses  in  Levittown were smaller versions  of the  expensive  sub-
urban ones the Levitt firm  had built previously,  but included an 

•  3 

• 

•  4  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

array  of  home  appliances  and  were  located  around  Village 
Greens that consisted of neighborhood shops, a playgt=ound, and a 
swimming  pooJ.2  Perhaps  these  additional  items  were  provided 
because  of  the  builder's  uncertainty  that  the  house  alone  was 
salable.  Levittown was,  after all,  an experiment, begun when the 
housing industry as  a whole  had known  only lack of demand and 
when  fears  of a  postwar  depression  were  still  prevalent.  But  the 
firm  also  had  an  additional  goal:  to  create  a  community.  This 
emerged  more  clearly  when  Alfred  Levitt,  who  was  trained  in 
architecture,  proposed his scheme for  Landia, a  675-acre commu-
nity elsewhere  on Long  Island.3  It was  planned  to  provide sepa-
rate  residential  neighborhoods  without  through  streets,  a  town 
center,  and  a  complete  set  of  community  facilities,  including 
parks. 

Landia  was  never  built,  partly  because  of the  moratorium on 
housing at the start of the Korean War, but some of its ideas were 
incorporated  in  the  building of the  second  Levittown,  in Bucks 
County,  Pennsylvania,  in  1951.  Although  the  Levitt  firm  was 
secure enough by this time to  buy a much larger amount of land 
at  the  start,  the  community was  still  not  totally  planned  in  ad-
vance,  the  individual  neighborhoods  being laid  out  just  before 
their construction.  The plan for  this second  Levittown called for 
about 17,ooo homes, and neighborhoods free from through traffic, 
with elementary schools,  playgrounds,  and  pools  at  their  center. 
The local shopping centers were almost  entirely eliminated after 
the firm  learned to its dismay that a  large shopping center in the 
Long Island Levittown-not built by the firm-was drawing most 
of the  sales  away  from  shops  on the Village  Greens.  Instead,  the 
Levitts  built a  huge  "regional"  shopping center  on  the  edge  of 
their  new  Levittown,  hoping  to  attract  not  only  their  house 
buyers but people from other communities as  well. The firm also 
gave  land  to  a  number of churches,  institutionalizing a  practice 
that had begun on an ad hoc basis in the initial Levittown when 
a church came to the builder with a request for free land. 

But  Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  like  Levittown,  ~.Island, 
had  one  major  drawback.  Because  of  the  way  land  ~ been 
purchased,  the  final  community was  spread  out ovett  foUf  town· 
ships and many other governmental units, arid in deve19fliDS  the 
land the builder had to negotiate separately with each unit, This 
not  only  took  considerable  time  and  energy,  but  required 
changes  in  the  initial  plan,  particularly  in  the  design  of  neigh· 

The  Planners  of  Levittown 
borhoods and location  of schools,  and also forced  the firm  to ad-
minister recreation  areas so  as  to  limit their use  to  purchasers of 
Levitt  houses.  As  a  result,  the  firm's  executives  were  frequently 
diverted  from  the  business  of  building  and  even  became  em-
broiled in community conflicts. 

•  5  • 

Not  long after  the  Bucks  County development had  gotten  off 
to a  successful  start,  the firm  began to consider yet a  third Levit·· 
town,  and  this  time  it sought  to  eliminate  the  difficulties  it had 
encountered previously by purchasing land within a single town-
ship.  Ultimately,  the  choice  fell  on  Willingboro  township  in 
New  Jersey.  Willingboro  township  was  an  area  of  small  farms, 
producing  peaches,  plums,  and  tomatoes  on  the  region's  sandy 
soil. Just outside the ring of postwar surburbs that had sprung up 
around Philadelphia, and  only about  ten  miles  from  Levittown, 
Pennsylvania,  it  was  eminently  "ripe"  for  residential  develop-
ment.  It was  particularly suitable for  Levitt and Sons  because  it 
was  inhabited only  by  individual  farmers,  a  few  owners of  what 
had  once  been  a  summer  home  colony,  and  the  village  of  Ran-
cocas,  a  nineteenth  century  Quaker  settlement  of  less  than  soo 
people. Soon after the firm  bought  the land,  it had the  township 
boundaries changed  so  that  Rancocas was  incorporated  into  the 
neighboring  township  of  Westampton.  Thus  it  had  obtained  a 
large  acreage,  located  entirely within  one  township  and  occupy-
ing most  of  it.  Once  Rancocas had  been moved  out,  only  about 
6oo  people were left  in the township,  and  they,  the  builder  felt, 
could  be  persuaded  to  give  him  a  free  hand  to  build  as  he 
wished.  Willingboro  would  provide  a  virtual  tabula  rasa  for 
realizing William Levitt's goals and plans. 

THE PLANNING  PROCESS 

By the time  the planning for  Levittown,  New Jersey,  began, con-
trol  of  the  firm  was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  William  Levitt. 
Abraham Levitt had retired because of increasing age, and Alfred 
Levitt  had  left  the  firm,  selling  his  share  of  the  stock  to  his 
brother, reputedly because  they  could not develop  a  method for 
making decisions jointly. Working with William Levitt were half 
a  dozen  executives,  many of whom  had been with  the firm  since 
the late  1940s,  but the final  decisions were his. 4  Like his brother, 
he was  open  to  advice,  but  he  was  known  as  a  man  who  rarely 
changed  his  mind  once  he  had  made  it  up.6  William  Levitt's 

•  6  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

goals  were  to build another profitable development and a  better 
community,  more  comprehensively  planned  in  advance  and 
more completely stocked with public facilities.  He also sought to 
end  the attacks  by  planners, architects,  and social  critics against 
the  firm  and  the  past  Levittowns.  Known  for  his low  opinion of 
the city planning profession,  however, and lacking Alfred's inter-
est  in its  concepts and schemes,  he  had no intention  of  building 
the community to please the planners.  Nor was  he especially con-
cerned about how to satisfy the buyers and meet their aspirations. 
As  the most successful  home builder in  the  East,  with a decade's 
reputation for  providing "the best  house  for  the money,"  he felt 
he knew what they wanted.  Unlike his father, he had no desire to 
involve the firm  in the life of the community or to uplift the cul-
tural  level  and  civic  performance  of  the  residents.  He  wanted 
only to  build what he deemed to  be a  better Levittown, what he 
often called a "showplace." 

Because of the success  of the Bucks County community, Levitt 
felt  secure  enough to buy So  per cent of the land he would need 
for  the  entire  community,  with  options  on  the  remaining  por-
tion.  A  fairly  complete plan of  the  eventual community was  de-
veloped,  including  an  overall  road  system,  a  community-wide 
sewage  and  water  supply  system  to  be  built  before  the  commu-
nity  was  occupied,  and  a  generalized  scheme  for  shopping,  in-
cluding  both  a  regional  retail  center and  a  series of local  ones, 
and  for  locating  schools  and  churches.  The  plan  was  gen-
eralized  in  that preliminary locations for  these  facilities were  in-
cluded in the site maps with which  the firm  worked, but final  lo-
cations and facility designs were not made until just before actual 
construction.  No  longer  needing  to  accommodate  his  ideas  to 
several  township boundaries,  the builder could plan  the commu-
nity as  a set of residential  "parks," with school,  playground, and 
pool  located  at  the  center in  true  neighborhood  planning tradi-
tion. 

There were other innovations  in the plan for  the  third  Levit· 
town. The elementary schools would be provided by the firm and 
their  cost  incorporated  into  the  house  price.  They  could  be 
"donated"  to  the  community,  thus  keeping  taxes  down,  and 
would  be  open when  people  moved  in.  The previous  pattern of 
neighborhoods with only one house type was dropped. From now 
on,  the  three  types  of houses  were  to be mixed on  each street:  a 
four-bedroom  "Cape  Cod"  initially  selling for  $u.soo;  a  three-

The  Planners  of  Levittown 

•  7  • 

bedroom,  one-story  "Rancher"  for  $13,ooo;  and  a  two-story 
"Colonial,"  one  with  three,  another  with  four  bedrooms  and 
costing  $14,000  and  $14,500  respectively.  Each  house  type  was 
built  in  two  elevations,  but  with  the  same  floor  plan,  and  was 
varied  in  external  color  to  effect  yet  more  visual  heterogeneity. 
Whereas the houses  in Levittown,  Pennsylvania, were of a  fairly 
severe modern style,  those in New Jersey would be in the pseudo-
Colonial  style  popular all  over  the  Eastern  seaboard.  The shop-
ping center, again located at the edge  of the community, was de-
signed  by  a  nationally  known  architect  who  had  built  a  prize-
winning  center  in  the  Middle  West,  providing  a  considerably 
more  attractive  shopping  area  than  in  the  Pennsylvania  Levit-
town. 

During  the  initial  planning  phase,  Levitt  employed  an  engi-
neer  with  city  planning experience  to  develop  the  overall  plan, 
and also brought in a number of nationally known consultants to 
design  detailed  plans  for  educational  and  recreational  facilities; 
but no city  planners were  included among  the  consultants.  Sub-
sequently,  he  did  work  with  the  planner  hired  by  Willingboro 
township, and in  1964, when the firm was  building developments 
of  varying  size  in  a  number  of  locations  all  over  the  world,  it 
finally  hired a  city planner to help select sites and make prelim-
inary master plans. 

The  executives  themselves  were  divided  into  two  relatively 
stable  factions,  the  self-styled  "idealists"  who  wanted  to  build 
what  they  considered  the  best  possible  community,  and  the 
"realists,"  concentrated  mainly  in  the  comptroller's  office,  who 
were concerned with economy and sometimes questioned innova-
tions that might increase costs or affect sales.  Levitt himself seems 
to have mediated between the two groups. In the initial phases of 
planning  he  sided  with  the  idealists,  but later,  when  plans  were 
about to  be implemented, he became more conscious of cost and 
market considerations and often supported the re.,Uists.  Generally 
speaking,  the  plans  put  forth  by  the  idealists  and  their  consul-
tants were accepted when they contributed to the development of 
the  best  community  at  the  lowest  cost,  and  rejected  when  they 
were  too  expensive  or  added  "frills"  that  would  not  help  sales. 
Although  Levitt  had  been  traditionally  hostile  to  outsiders,  he 
accepted  many of the consultants'  proposals--often  because  they 
agreed  with  his  own  ideas.  The  consultants  had  been  chosen 
initially because of their national reputations, and the agreement 

•  8  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

between  them and  Levitt was  often fortuitous.  For example,  the 
concept  of  the  school  at  the  center  of  the  neighborhood,  origi-
nally  brought  into  the  firm  by  Alfred  Levitt,  was  also  part  of 
traditional  planning ideology and was  favored  by the school con-
sultants as well.  Similarly, because the firm wanted to divest itself 
of control of the recreation  facilities and believed that the school 
and  playground  would  be  used  by  the  same  people  and  should 
therefore be administered jointly. it proposed a combined school-
playground-pool area.  When  the firm  asked the National  Recrea-
tion Association  for  technical  help,  it did not know  that  that or-
ganization  had  advocated  such  a  combination  for  almost  forty 
years. 

But some plans were rejected.  One Levitt official wanted a new 
and comprehensively planned educational  system  to  be designed 
under  the  aegis  of  the  Ford  Foundation,  but  when  Foundation 
funds  for  this  scheme  were  not  available,  a  more  conventional 
school  system,  more akin to  existing county and  township values 
and  practices,  was  developed  instead.  The  ambitious  recreation 
plan  of  another  firm  member,  providing  for  a  large  park  and 
playground  system  around  the  school  and  more  than  one swim-
ming  pool  for  each  neighborhood,  was  similarly  cut  down  to 
make  more  land  available  for  houses.  As  the  time  for  bu-ilding 
drew  closer,  both of  these  officials  who stood for  a  maximum in-
vestment  in  community  facilities  could  not  agree  with  the  em-
phasis  on  housing,  and eventually  they  were  fired,  although  not 
for this reason alone. 

Perhaps  the  principal  innovation  in  the  new  Levittown  was 
the mixing of house types. This idea, originally suggested by Mrs. 
Levitt,  debated  within  the  firm  for  several  months,  and  finally 
carried out by Levitt over  the strong objections of all  his execu-
tives,  stemmed indirectly from  the criticisms of the city planners, 
particularly  Lewis  Mumford.  During the  1950s,  when attacks on 
the  physical  and  demographic  homogeneity  of  the  postwar  sub-
urban  subdivisions  began,  Levittown  was  frequently  mentioned 
as  the prototype.  At first,  the  firm  shrugged off  this criticism.  As 
it continued to mount, however, and spread into the mass media, 
Levitt  became  concerned  that  Levittown's  image  would  be  im-
paired and  even  that sales  might  be  affected,  particularly  when, 
later  in  the  decade,  the  sellers'  market was  starting  to  become a 
buyers'  market.  By  the time he was  ready to start the third Levit-

The  Planners  of  Levittown 

•  9  • 

town,  Levitt also  wanted a  reputation  for  building the best  pos-
sible communities. 

In  addition,  the  firm  was  beginning  to  upgrade  the  image  of 
the purchaser it was  seeking.  In Long Island  it had built for  vet-
erans and had attracted predominantly lower middle class buyers. 
In Pennsylvania, however, Levittown also drew a number of blue 
collar  workers  and  what  Levitt  officials  worriedly  called  "mar-
ginal"  buyers,  people  who  could not  really  afford  the  house. but 
were able to take it because no down  payment had been required 
under Veterans  Administration  mortgage  insurance  regulations. 
The  firm  did  not  want  marginal  buyers  in the  new  Levittown, 
and,  in  fact,  hoped  to  build  somewhat  more  expensive  houses 
which  would  increase  its  profit  margin.  If it  was  to  do  so,  and 
bring  in  middle  and  upper  middle  class  home  buyers,  Levitt 
wanted  to  prove  incorrect  the  critical  magazine  articles  on  sub-
urbia  read  by  this  population.  When  the  idea  of  mixed  house 
types  was  approved,  one  of  the  Levitt  executives  pointed  out, 
"Now  Lewis  Mumford  can't  criticize  us  any  more";  later,  the 
firm  promoted  the  innovation  as  a  sales  device.  In  the  press  re-
lease announcing the ope.ning of the new Levittown,  Levitt said, 
"We  are  ending  once  and  for  all  the  old  bugaboo  of  uniform-
ity . . . .  In  the  new  Levittown,  we  build  all  the  different 
houses  . . .  right  next  to  each  other  within  the  same  section." 
The  struggle  against  criticism  affected  other  features  of  the 
plan.  Although  the  Levitts  personally  identified  so  much  with 
their  developments  as  to  give  them  the  family  name,  William 
Levitt was  quite aware that some people considered "Levittown" 
a  symbol  of  the  worst  in  suburban  development,  even  if others 
saw itas a  brand name for good and inexpensive houses. 6  Several 
executives  urged  strongly  that  the  name  be dropped,  but  Levitt 
rejected  the  idea.  As  a  compromise,  the  merchandising  was  to 
stress  the  individual  parks  into  which  people  would  buy.  A 
Levitt  official  pointed  out,  "One  of  the  major  reasons  for  the 
neighborhood  plan  was  to  answer  the  critics  of  Levittown  who 
say  that it is one huge mass of homogeneous mass-produced hous-
ing,  all  preplanned  to  standardization  and  mass  production." 
Shortly  before  Levittown,  New Jersey,  opened  for  occupancy, 
an  article  by  William  Levitt  entitled  "What!  Live  in  a  Levit-
town?"  appeared  in  Good  Housekeeping. 7  In  it,  the  builder 
argued-and  quite  rightly  scr-that  mass-produced  housing  did 

•  10  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

not  lead  to  conformity  or  homogeneity  among  the  population. 
After  Levittown  opened,  many  tongue-in-cheek  advertisements 
appeared in the Philadelphia papers which sought to give the im-
pression  that Levittowners were diverse, respectably middle class, 
but not overly sophisticated. One ad,  headed "Wanted:  Zoologist 
for a  Neighbor,"  indicated  that all  occupations were represented 
in  Levittown  but  listed  mostly  professional  ones.  Another,  en-
titled "Hi and  Middle Fi," suggested  that the Levitt house could 
be rigged  up for hi-fi  enthusiasts,  but poked fun at such sophisti-
cated  taste  and  concluded,  "You'll  find  all  kinds of music  lovers 
in Levittown, but we've discovered that most of them are middle-
fi,  like ourselves."  8 

When  it came  to  planning the houses,  however,  there was  len 
concern with status than with livability and effective use of space. 
The houses  built in the third Levittown were radically improved 
versions  of  the  models  built  in  the  earlier  ones,  altered  fre-
quently  and  sometimes  annually  in  a  process  of  trial  and  error 
that responded  partly to market reactions,  partly to technological 
innovation and cost-cutting opportunities, and  partly to a  desire 
for  change  within  the  Levitt  firm.  The  basic  construction  con-
cepts  and  layouts  have  remained  remarkably  stable,  however. 
The Levitt house is built on a concrete slab with precut materials 
and  is  put  together  on  an assembly  line  basis.9  The layout  pro-
vides  a  relatively  open  house  plan,  with  maximum  space  for 
rooms  and  for  storage,  and  a  minimum  for  circulation  or  sym-
bolic, non utilitarian space such as a foyer. 

In the initial  planning phase, Levitt considered a  total revision 
of the basic house types, and asked  two world-famous architects to 
submit sketch  plans.  \Vhen  their houses  turned out to cost about 
$5o,ooo,  they had  to  be dropped, and the firm's  own small  archi-
tectural  department,  with  assistance  from  Levitt  executives,  was 
given  the  job  of  revamping  the  designs  used  in  Levittown, 
Pennsylvania.  When  models  of  the  houses  were  erected,  Levitt 
himself looked them over and suggested changes. After the model 
was  opened  to  the  public,  criticisms  and suggestions  for  it were 
recorded  at  the  sales  desk.  If a  model  did  not  sell,  it  was  rede-
signed  at  once.  Usually  the  models  were  not  altered  until  the 
annual  model  change  or until  sales  dropped to a  point where al-
teration was considered necessary. 10 

The  improvements  made  in  the  houses  over  time  have  in-
creased  their  spaciousness  and  efficiency,  with  little  concern  for 

The  Planners  of  Levittown 

•  11  • 

fashion  except  in  inexpensive  externals.  Despite  the  popularity 
of  basement  or  split-level  designs,  the  finn  refused  to  consider 
them  until  1965,  when  it  built some  basement  houses  in  a  new 
Long  Island  project.  Likewise,  Levitt  officials  chose  the  pseudo-
Colonial design for New Jersey, not because of its popularity, but 
because  they  felt  it would  help  them  attract  higher-income  pur-
chasers,  and because  they themselves disliked  the starkly modern 
designs  they had  initiall.Y  built in  Levittown,  Pennsylvania.  The 
design  of  the  Levittown  houses  proceeded,  then,  on  an  ad  hoc 
basis,  with  periodic  improvements  based  on  what  the  firm 
thought best and with recognition of  the vetoes expressed  in the 
market.  Beyond  this  point,  there  was  no  catering  to  the  cus-
tomers. 

For  this  reason,  no market research  of any kind went into  the 
planning  of  Levittown,  New  Jersey,  although  just  before  the 
community  opened  some  of  the  less  optimistic  Levitt  officials 
commissioned  a  prominent  land  economist  to  estimate  the 
market for the community.  His report was  extremely pessimistic, 
noting  that  the  metropolitan area market for  low-priced,  single-
family housing was almost saturated, and that the new  Levittown 
was  located  outside  of  what  were  then  considered  the  bound-
aries  of  Philadelphia's suburban  commuting zone.  As  it  turned 
out,  the consultant's prediction was  accurate, for  by  1960 the soft 
market  conditions  he  had  forecast  began  to  appear,  forcing  a 
slowdown  in  the construction schedule  that  has  continued  until 
the  present.  Although  the  finn  expected  to  build  12,000  houses 
by  1965,  it had only put up about 6ooo  by  that date-and it had 
also established a market research department. 

In  planning  for  the  new  Levittown,  however,  Levitt  had  no 
inkling of what was  to come. His mass  production techniques had 
previously  enabled  the  firm  to  undersell  its  competitors  in  the 
area,  and  in a  seller's  market  it did not  need  to  think about  the 
buyers.  The  Levitt  officials'  ability  to  make  decisions  without 
consulting them  was  aided considerably by  their consensus  with 
and  similarity  to  their  customers.  Most  of  the  Levitt  executives 
were born and raised  in the suburbs, and had little or no use  for 
the  city,  other  than  as  a  place  for  occasional  recreational  and 
shopping  trips.  They  favored  single-family  housing  and  could 
not  understand  why  anyone  would  want  to  live  either  in  apart-
ments  or  in  the  row  houses  that  had  been  Philadelphia's  domi-
nant  building  type.  They  believed  that  the  utility  of  the  house 

•  12  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

for  family  living  carne  first  and  that  style  was  secondary.  Their 
taste  was  not  much  different  from  that  of  their customers;  both 
rejected  the  abstract  and severe  contemporary design  that domi-
nated the architectural magazines of the late 1950s. 

If anything,  the  firm's  official  style  was  a  more  exuberant ver-
sion  of  its  customers',  in  much  the  same  way  as  movie  stars  are 
often  exaggerated  versions  of  what  their  fans  would  like  to  be. 
Indeed,  a  decade  earlier,  Eric  Larrabee  had  described  the  first 
Levitt  office  building  as  "Selznick  Colonial." 11  The  new  head-
quarters building the firm  put up in Levittown,  New Jersey, was 
furnished in what one might call  Dionysian-Modem, a vivid and 
often  garish  mixture  of  bright  colors,  strong  textures,  and  an-
tique  as  well  as  modem  knickknacks.  Levitt's  office  had  whiJ_e 
rugs  and  gold-plated  bathroom  fixtures,  and  the  model  homes, 
furnished  to  entice  purchasers,  displayed a  similar,  if less  expen-
sive, Dionysian motif. 

About  their  purchasers'  aspirations  for  life  in  Levittown,  the 
Levitt officials  thought  only rarely.  Some  looked  down  on  them 
as  being  of a  lesser  status,  but others  saw  them as  smart,  young, 
socially  mobile  couples  who  really  wanted  to  live  in  high-status 
suburbs  but  could  not  afford  to  do  so.  Mostly,  the  firm  viewed 
them as  people who needed a new house and were obviously sen-
sible  in  their  choice  of  Levittown,  because  they  realized  that 
Levitt's houses were the best value for the money.  It also felt that 
most  of  their  buyers  were  moving  to  Levittown  only  because  of 
the  house  and  had  little  interest  in  the  wider  community.  As  a 
result,  whenever  Levittowners  objected  to  conditions  in  the 
community, firm  officials were  quick  to argue-whether the firm 
was responsible or not-that the objections were those of a minor-
ity,  "self-seeking  politicians,"  or  "sick"  people  who just wanted 
to  show  off  for  psychological  reasons.  Suspicion  of  community 
participation  was  a  tradition  of  the  Levitt  organization,  even 
though  there  had  been  much  less  builder-buyer  conflict  in  the 
Levittowns  than  in  most  other  new  housing  developments. 12 

Marketing  the  House 

The only deliberate  planning vis·a-vis the eventual  purchasers 
took place in marketing the house.  That process was  aimed at at: 
tracting the young family  buying its first  home, a group to which 
the  builder  had  appealed  ever  since  he  began  to  build  the  first 
Levittown.  The  houses  were  designed  with  young  children  in 

The  Planners  of  Levittown 

•  13  • 

mind, with bedrooms just large  enough  to  serve  as  playrooms as 
well,  an  extra  bathroom  for  them,  and  the  kitchen  located  so 
mothers  could  watch  their  children  play  outside.18  In  addition, 
Levitt provided all  the necessary kitchen  appliances,  eliminating 
extra  initial  expenditures.  He  absorbed  settlement  costs,  which 
often come  to  5 per cent or more of the house price, and he sim-
plified  the sales  procedure so  that  buying a  house  was  almost as 
easy  as  buying  a  washing  machine.  His advertising  stressed  that 
there were "no hidden  extras,  and  the  price you  pay  is  the price 
we  say."  Unlike builders of higher-priced  houses,  he emphasized 
the size  of  the down  payment-which  thanks  to  FHA  insurance 
was  low-and  the  monthly  payments,  so  that  prospective  pur-
chasers  could  readily  figure  exactly  how  much  the  house  would 
take out of the paycheck. 

The  firm  went  to  a  considerable  effort  to  keep  the  monthly 
payment  figure  as  low  as  possible.  As  already  noted,  the  builder 
"donated"  the  schools  to  the  community.  During the  first  years, 
he  subsidized  the  schools'  operating costs  as  weii,  holding  taxes, 
which were added to  the monthly payment, at a  level  that would 
not  frighten  away  tite  family  earning  $6ooo  or  $7ooo  a  year. 
Thanks to  the scale on which the firm  was  operating,  the cost of 
schools,  utilities,  and  road  system  could  be  added  tQ  the  house 
price  without raising  it  beyond  what  other  builders  in  the  area 
were charging. 

While ail  the ads  mentioned  the  schools,  churches,  and  pools, 
the  major  emphasis  was  on  the size  and value of the  house,  pre-
sented in a confident yet catchy style as  if to dare skeptics to come 
to  see  whether  Levittown's  values  were  real.  Many  ads  were 
written  by  William  Levitt  himself.  When  the  prospective  pur-
chaser  came  out  to  the  model  homes  area,  his  attention  was 
focused  on  the  house,  and  the  sales  process  itself  was  muted  as 
much  as  possible.  The  salesmen  were  carefuily  selected  and 
trained  to  contradict  the  image  of  the  fast-buck,  easy-talking 
salesmen  traditionaiiy  associated  with  real  estate.  "Courteous 
representatives  are  on  hand  to  answer  your  questions,"  the  ads 
read. They were dressed in conservative dark clothes--to look like 
bankers, as  one Levitt official put it-and they were instructed by 
a  professional  speech  teacher  to  talk  in  a  sedate  but  friendly 
manner. 

'Vhile everyone was welcome to buy in Levittown, the firm did 
try  to  screen  out  two  types  of  people:  the  marginal  buyers  and 

•  14  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

the socially undesirable or emotionally disturbed.  Partly because 
of  FHA  regulations,  the  firm  had  set  an  income  floor  for  pur-
chasers:  people who wanted to buy had  to  have a  weekly  income 
10 per cent above the monthly carrying charge-more if they had 
many children or large outstanding debts.  Those  who  could  not 
meet  this  figure  were  asked  for  a  larger  down  payment or  were 
advised  against  putting  down  the  deposit,  and  some  were  ex-
cluded by the subsequent credit check. The salesmen were not to 
sell  to disreputable or especially  unkempt  people,  and  the credit 
check  excluded  people  with  a  record  of  job  instability  or  legal 
difficulties. 14  The  "social  filtering"  process  was,  however,  less 
effective  than  the  income  check,  for  some  people with  serious--
but not visible-problems were able to buy into the community. 
Until  the state enforced a  nondiscrimination  law,  salesmen  re-
fused  to  sell  to  Negroes  and  assured  whites  who  asked  abouT 
Negroes  that  the community would  be as  lily-white  as  the other 
Levittowns.  After  the  law  was  enforced,  the  salesmen  protected 
themselves by citing the .law,  and  promised  to  locate people who 
did  not  like  to  be  near  Negroes  away  from  them,  but  also  dis-
couraged  those  who  were  strongly  biased  against  Negroes  from 
buying  in  Levittown.  (The  story  of  Levittown's  integration  is 
told in Chapter Fourteen.) 

LEVITT  AND  WILLINGBORO  TOWNSillP 

The  Levitt  planning  did  not  take  place  within  a  vacuum,  of 
course.  Perhaps  the  most  important  outside  influences  were  the 
federal  government,  which  thwugh FHA insured  the  mortgages 
of  the  purchasers, and  the  banks  who  purchased  them.  Without 
the  FHA,  Levittown  could  not  have  been  built,  for  the  banks 
would  not  take  the  uninsured  mortgages  of  middle-income, 
young home buyers whose long-term financial status was,  at best, 
unpredictable. Levitt had to meet the FHA regulations,  both for 
the design of the house and the community, and the expectations 
of the bankers and savings and loan association officials,  but since 
the previous Levittowns had met FHA standards,  this created no 
problem.  Indeed,  thanks  to  his  previous success,  Levitt was  able 
to quiet the fears of his bankers that the mixing of house types on 
the street would inhibit sales. 

The  other  group  which  played  a  role-even  if  not  a  major 
one-in the early planning of Levittown was the government and 

The  Planners  of  Levittown 

•  15  • 

the old residents of Willingboro township. Willingboro township 
was  a  sleepy  farming  area  with  a  history-albeit  uneventful-
dating back to William Penn's arrival in the Philadelphia area in 
1681. Its political and civic life was in the hands of a  few  families 
some of whom had been in power for at least  125 years.  Although 
one  or  two  were  wealthy,  most  of  them  were  friendly  and easy-
going  lower  middle  class  people,  who explained guilelessly  that 
they were running township affairs because no one else was  inter-
ested and someone had  to do  it.  Yet newcomers  to  the township, 
and  especially  those  with  dissident  views,  were  often  denied 
access to the political and social elite. 

In  1952,  the township had set up a  Planning Board, mainly be-
cause,  in  the words  of its founder,  "We just went along with the 
crowd;  everybody  was  doing  it."  Also,  it  was  feared  that  even· 
tually  subdividers  would  come  to  the  area,  and  the  township 
ought to  protect itself.  A  zoning ordinance was  passed,  designat-
ing  the  land  as  agricultural,  but  nothing  else  was  done  until 
1955,  when  it became  known  that  land  was  being purchased  by 
unknown  buyers.  At  that  time,  the  chairman  of  the  Planning 
Board decided to hire a planning consultant. 

The planning consultant was  a  professional  who  had  been ac· 
tive in other parts of Burlington County for several years and saw 
his  role as  one of educating this predominantly rural area to the 
virtues  of  master  planning.  His  ideas  reflected  those  traditional 
among planners:  orderly and effective  use of the land to  prevent 
patches of vacant land amidst other development that would lead 
to  urban  sprawl,  and an  esthetically  pleasing  landscape.  He was 
particularly concerned with the elimination of "strip shopping," 
believing stores strung out on i:najor streets and highways  to be a 
"commercial  cancer  growth,"  which  might  blight  residential 
neighborhoods near them. A  crusader on this  topic,  he was  espe-
cially  intent  on  keeping  out  essential  but  unsightly  enterprises 
such  as  ice  cream  parlors,  hot  dog  stands,  and  commercial 
garages. 

Once  hired by  the  township,  the planner persuaded  it  to have 
him draw up a  master  plan which  he  hoped the Levitt organiza-
tion  would  also  follow.  Initially,  Levitt  was  hostile;  he  wanted 
total  control  and  was  fearful  of  any  outside  interference,  espe-
cially  by  a  city  planner.  Consequently,  he  urged  the  Planning 
Board to fire  the planner, but was  persuaded that this was an in· 
auspicious  beginning  for  Levitt's  relationship with  Willingboro 

•  16  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

township.  Since the firm  was sensitive to criticism about the lack 
of  planning  in  earlier  Levittowns,  the  planner  was  eventually 
able  to  persuade  the  Levitt  organization  that  a  master  plan 
would be  to  its  benefit.  On the other hand,  the  planner realized 
that  his  master  plan  would  be  largely  dependent  on  Levitt's 
building program.  He soon concluded that the cause of planning 
and  his  own  efforts  could  best  be  advanced  by  siding  with  the 
builder,  whom  he  considered  an  agent  of  progress,  rather  than 
with  the  existing  residents,  some  of  whom  would  probably  be 
opposed to the new community. 

The township Planning Board knew little about city planning, 
but  its  members  were  sincere  and  earnest  enough  to  feel  that 
planning,  whatever  it  might  be,  was  a  good  thing.  The  con-
sultant's first  recommendation was  a  revision  of the zoning ordi-
nance which would enable it--or the consultant-to prevent strip 
shopping  on  the  major  highway  on  which  Levittown  fronts. 
Naturally,  the people who owned this  land objected strenuously. 
This  zoning  ordinance  crystallized  the  township  into  pro- and 
anti-Levitt  factions.  Generally  speaking,  the  people  whose  land 
Levitt  had  bought-mostly  the  bigger  landowners,  since  he  was 
interested only in large acreage-were, if not in favor of Levitt, at 
least amenable.  Conversely,  those  who  had not been approached 
by Levitt-people who owned only two or three acres--or did not 
want to sell  to Levitt made up the anti-Levitt faction.  From  this 
time  on  until  the  arrival  of  the  new  Levittowners,  the  once 
peaceful  politics  of  the  township  were  no  more;  old friendships 
and  alliances  disintegrated  as  some  sided  with,  others  against 
Levitt. 

The  hateful  zoning  ordinance  was  rescinded  after  the  people 
on  the  highway  started  court  proceedings.  This,  as  well  as  the 
general antagonism to  Levitt by some of the community leaders, 
helped  to  bring the  planning consultant  firmly  on  Levitt's  side. 
He decided that the old residents were interested only in making 
as  much  money  as  they  could  from  Levitt's  presence  and  that 
they had no interest in good planning.  From then on, the consul-
tant worked so  closely  with  the builder that  it caused  him some 
difficulty  in obtaining the community's  trust.  Because  of this re-
lationship, the planner knew the firm's still confidential building 
plans  and  was  therefore  reluctant  to  talk  to  citizens,  which  also 
affected his relationship to  the community. Indeed, when I  asked 
him  for  an  interview  to  learn  about  the  master  plan,  I  was  re-

The  Planners  of  Levittown 

•  17  • 

fused,  only  to  receive  a  call  from  a  Levitt  vice-president  who 
asked  why  I  wanted  the  interview.  Once  I  had  explained  my 
study to him, I  had no trouble in obtaining an interview with the 
planning consultant. 

Levitt had never favored  the ordinance against strip shopping 
as  much as  the planner, and once it had been rescinded,  the firm 
had little difficulty in persuading the township fathers to approve 
his  building  plans.  There  were  several  reasons  for  this.  First, 
some of the people in the pro-Levitt faction planned to remain in 
Willingboro  township  even  after  Levittown  had  been  built and 
believed that the interests of their community could best be served 
by letting Levitt go ahead with  his develvpment without  undue 
harassment.  They  wanted  to  live  in  a  good-looking  and  well-
planned  township,  and  had  been  persuaded  that  the  anti-Levitt 
faction  would  sell  its  land  to  speculators  who  would  put up hot 
dog  stands,  small  factories,  and  the  other  low-status  outlets 
against  which  the  planning  consultant  had  been  campaigning. 
Some  had  more  immediate  motives;  they  hoped  to  work  in  the 
township,  either  in  the  government  or  in  stores  which  they 
would open to serve the new residents. 

Also,  the  firm's  intention  to  build-and  pay  for-most  of  the 
municipal  facilities  relieved  public officials  of the need  to worry 
about  them.  Unlike  small  subdividers  elsewhere  in  the  county, 
Levitt was  providing the schools,  roads,  water and sewage  plants, 
and other facilities, and because he was doing so--and because the 
new Levittowners would be paying for  them-the older residents 
of the  township felt  he ought to  have  the right to determine  the 
character  of  those  facilities.  They  all  realized  that  whatever  he 
provided  would  be far  superior  to  what had  existed  before,  and 
possibly even better than what would be built with public funds. 
As  a  rural area,  Willingboro  township-and  Burlington County 
-had not been noted for lavishness in the provision of public fa-
cilities in the past. 

The  public  officials  who  had  to  approve  the  Levitt  building 
plans could,  of  course~ have  asked  for  better or more  expensive 
facilities.  In some  instances,  however,  they had no legal  basis for 
such requests, since the township and county both lacked modern 
building and  other codes.  Yet  even when  they had effective  veto 
power over Levitt's operations,  they did not often  think to exer-
cise  it,  because  they  felt  Levitt was  trying  to do a  good  job and 
would  make  the  township  the  best  in  the  county.  Cooperation 

•  18  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

with  the builder  would  be  far  more  pleasant  than conflict,  they 
concluded,  particularly  since  they  had  little  chance  of  winning 
such conflict. 

Most of the old residents were farmers,  without the knowledge 
and skills to stand up against the builder.  For example, the ablest 
member of the Planning Board thought that the township would 
look better if Levitt were required to build on 75-foot lots rather 
than on the 6o-foot lots he wanted to allow for in  the subdivision 
ordinance.  He could not, however,  make his argument stick,  and 
after Levitt had promised that he would never build on less  than 
65-foot lots, he gave in. 

The Levitt firm  itself was not passive in the face of opposition. 
Its  officials  had  had  two  decades  of  experience  in  dealing  with 
local opposition, and they had a reputation for brilliant tactics as 
well  as  the  application  of campaign  funds  in  the  right  place  at 
the right  time.  When  Levitt  first  arrived  on  the  scene,  the  firm 
engaged some  prominent county figures  to  buy land,  and before 
the  planning was  over,  it  had 'hired,  for  one  reason  or another, 
most of the politically influential lawyers in the county and many 
who had influence in  the state capitol  as  well,  principally for  the 
alteration  of  township  boundaries.  Although  the  firm  never  in-
terfered officially  in county or township politics, and usually sent 
campaign  contributions  to  both  parties,  it  gave  more  to  defeat 
candidates it thought could cause trouble for the firm.  Every new 
community is  flooded with rumors that some local officials are on 
the  builder's  payroll,  and  Levittown  was  no  exception,  but one 
Levitt executive indicated that the  township leaders were so will-
ing to go along with the firm's wishes  that such distasteful  tactics 
were not necessary. 

Even  if  local  politicians  had  wanted  to  fight  Levitt,  they  had 
little  political  incentive.  Their  remaining  old  constituents  did 
not really  care  about· matters  that concerned  only  the  new com-
munity,  and  the  new  constituents  were  not  yet  on  the  scene. 
Even if  the politicians could agree among themselves to put up a 
united front against  Levitt  (which  was  not often  the case),  there 
was  always  the  possibility  that  he would  intervene against  them 
at  higher  political  levels  in  the  county and  state.  But when  the 
township officials did question the Levitt proposals,  it was almost 
always  on matters of detail.  On the larger  issues  they agreed,  for 
they  shared  some  basic  values  with  the  firm,  and  they  united 
against  a  common  enemy.  Both  were  antiurban,  and  both  re-

The  Planners  of  Levittown 

•  19  • 

sented  the  cosmopolitan,  upper  middle  class,  intellectual  values 
they associated  with  the  big city,  believing that planning should 
uphold the local values of the small  middle or lower middle class 
community. 13  This consensus  was  demonstrated  in  the  planning 
of the new school system. 

The  Ford  Foundation,  which  had  suggested  a  comprehensive 
planning program for  the Levittown  schools,  had urged  that the 
superintendent of an upper middle class  New  England suburban 
school  system  of national  repute  be hired  to  head  it,  to plan an 
educational  program  whose  graduates  would  presumably  head 
toward  the  most  cosmopolitan  of  the  country's  colleges.  When 
funds  for  this  plan  were  not forthcoming,  Levitt turned  the job 
of designing the schools  over to a  national  firm  of school  consul-
tants, and asked  the county Superintendent of Schools  to develop 
the  curriculum  and  hire  the  staff.  Both  the  consultants and  the 
superintendent defended more  traditional  local  approaches.  The 
consultants disliked  big-city schools and were conservative about 
educational innovation. "If you are going to try something new," 
the  principal  consultant  pointed  out,  "you  need  someone  to 
bounce  your  ideas  against,"  but  the  new  Levittowners  had  not 
yet arrived and  the township Board of Education was  hesitant to 
speak  for  them.  As a  result,  the  final  architectural  program  was 
the  consultants'  standard  package.  The  county  superintendent 
had spent most of his  professional  life in Burlington County, was 
personally  interested  in  rural  education,  and  did  not  favor 
teachers  from  the  big  cities  or  from  high-status  suburbs  who 
might  question  the  township's  rural,  lower  middle  class  values. 
I  do  not  know  how  the  Levitt  organization  felt  about  the 
Foundation's  cosmopolitan  educational  concepts,  but  it  had  no 
educational  aims  of  its  own,  and judging by  its  feelings  toward 
the  intellectuals  then  criticizing  suburbia,  it  was  not  distressed 
over the change in plans.  In any case,  the firm supported the con-
sultants  and  the  superintendent  fully,  allowing  the  township 
Board  of  Education  to  feel  that  its  essentially  rural  educational 
values  would  be  perpetuated  in  the  new  Levittown.  Subse-
quently,  the  county superintendent was  hired  to  run  the  Levit-
town  schools,  and  in  the  years  to  come,  when  the conflict  about 
upper middle class cosmopolitan and lower middle class local  ed-
ucation  raged  among  the  Levittowners  themselves,  the  builder 
was usually found on the side of the latter. 

As  it turned out, then, the goals of the Levitt organization and 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

the  township  were  never far  apart,  and  even  if  Levitt  sought  to 
accommodate  some  of  the criticism  of suburbia  in  his  planning, 
he was not  ready  to  build  the  kind of 'urbane  new  town  that  in-
tellectuals would approve.  Both in  their business judgments and 
in  their  personal  inclinations,  the  Levitt  officials  sided with  the 
young, middle class purchasers with whom they had been dealing 
successfully  in  the  past and  who,  they were sure,  would  approve 
the  innovations  they  had  made  in  their  aim  to  create  a  show-
place-but a  profitable one-in the newest  Levittown. 

NOTES 

1.  For an early  history of  the Levitt organization,  see  Larrabee. 
2.  Larrabee.  For  a  more  detailed  description  of  Levittown,  New 
York,  see  Liell  (1952),  Wattel,  and Dobriner (1963),  Chap. 4· 

3,  See  Alfred S.  Levitt. 
4·  In the pages that follow,  I  will for  this reason use  Levitt, meaning 
William  Levitt,  as  a  synonym  for  the  firm,  although  he  did  not 
always make personally all the decisions  thus ascribed to him. 
5·  The material in the following  section  is  based  on interviews with 
a number of Levitt executives.  Unfortunately,  I  was  never able to 
obtain interviews with either William or Alfred Levitt. 

6.  F.arly in the building of Levittown,  Long Island, a group of Levit-
towners tried to get their post office  address changed to  Hicksville. 
Later,  in  Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  the  people  who  had  bought 
the  high-priced  houses  also  wanted  to  detach  themselves  from 
Levittown,  and at one point tried  to  buy  the  neighborhood pool 
for  their own use. 
7·  William  J.  Levitt. 
8.  Philadelphia  Evening Bulletin, March  1,  1959,  and February  26, 

g.  The firm's building methods are described in Levitt and Sons, and 

1959, respectively. 

in Practical Builder. 

10.  Often, the saving is  passed on to the purchaser, for the cost of the 
house  on a  square-foot  basis  has  not  increased  significantly  since 
the first  Levittown. The houses themselves have grown in size;  the 
Levittown, Long Island homes had only two bedrooms and an un-
finished  attic;  in Levittown,  New Jersey,  they  initially had  three 
or  four  bedrooms,  and  a  minimum  square  footage  of  over  uoo 
square  feet  even  in  the  smallest  one.  In  1963,  the  firm  began  to 
experiment with five-bedroom houses,  and in 1964,  to build them. 

11.  Larrabee,  p.  81. 
12.  On  earlier  manifestations  of  this  suspicion,  see  Larrabee,  p.  84, 

and  LieU  (1952). 

The  Planners  of  Levittown 

• 

.21 

• 

13.  Conversely,  the house was less suited to families with teenage chil-
dren, for the bedrooms were not large enough to serve their needs, 
and the compact design of the house and its lack of soundproofing 
made  it  difficult  for  teenagers  and  adults  to  have  privacy  from 
each other. 

14.  One Levittowner tested this by coming in shabby clothes and sev-
eral days' beard to buy a house, only to be refused. The next week, 
he came  back clean  and clean-shaven  and  was  sold  a  house. 
15.  On the conception of cosmopolitans and locals, see  Merton (1957). 

D 

Chapter Two 

D 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS-AND 
WHY  THEY  CAME 

0 

II 

-·~-

IN  1958,  BEFORE  LEVITTOWN,  NEW  JERSEY,  WAS  OCCUPIED,  THE 
township  contained about 300  households.  By  tg6o,  the  number 
had risen  to  2978  (totaling  II,861  individuals). and  by  1964,  to 
about  6200  households  (with  about  25,000  individuals).  The 
people  to  be described  in this chapter are  the fint  !JOOO  families 
who  came  to  Levittown  between  October  1958  and  June  1960.1 
These  Levittowners  were,  like  many  other  suburbanites,  pri-
marily young families  who came  to  the  new community  to raise 
their  children.2  At  the  time  of  their  arrival  in  1958-1960,  al-
most  four  fifths  of  the  men  were  under forty;  44  per  cent  were 
between  the  ages  of  thirty  and  forty. 8  Ten  per cent  were  as  yet 
childless  couples;  another  6  per  cent,  in  which  the  wives  were 
over  thirty-five,  were  probably  permanently  childless.  Median 
family  size,  according  to  the  1960  Census,  was  !t·90· but  at  the 
time of arrival.  in  1958-t96o, almost  a  fifth  of the  families  had 
three  children,  and  another  1 1  per  cent  had  four  or  more.  A 
third  of  the  families  had  only children  of  preschool  age;  5  per 
cent had a majority of the children in high school. 

At time of arrival, the median family  income of the population 
was  $7125;  11  per cent earned  more  than  $10,500  and about  20 
per cent earned  less  than  the $5500  required  for  buyers  making 
the minimal down payment. 4  Eighteen per cent of the men were 
professionals,  56  per cent were white coiiar workers,  and  16  per 
cent  w~re blue collar workers.  Among  the white coiiar workers, 

The  Levittowners-and  Why  They  Came 

13  per cent were managers and mihor officials;  18  per  cent were 
technicians and semiprofessionals; and the remaining 25  per cent 
were  in  clerical  and  sales  work.  The  blue  collar  workers  were 
divided into 7 per cent foremen,  10 per cent skilled workers,  and 
9  per cent semiskilled and unskilled  workers.  Most  of the  Levit-
towners  worked  in  the  offices,  stores,  and  electronics  and  other 
manufacturing and research  plants in Philadelphia and Camden, 
but  12  per cent were in the armed forces,  principally as  Air Force 
pilots.  Being mainly young people,  their educational  levels  were 
fairly  high.  According  to  the  1960  Census,  43  per  cent  had  at-
tended college,  27  per cent graduating;  only 28  per cent had not 
received a high school diploma. 

Although  these  statistics  suggest  that  most  Levittowners  were 
lower middle class,  they still  overestimate  the upper middle and 
working class  populations.  Most  of  the  professionals  were  teach-
ers  and social  workers;  only  10  per cent of them were doctors or 
lawyers.  Also,  the  majority  of  those  who  attended  college  had 
gone  to  junior  and  community  colleges,  small  private  schools, 
and  state  universities;  probably  less  than  10  per  cent  had  at-
tended  the  "name"  universities  of  high  educational  and  social 
status.  I  would guess  that  no  more  than  5  to  10  per cent of  the 
Levittowners could be considered upper middle class. 

Conversely,  most  of  the  blue collar  Levittowners  were  in  the 
highest-skill,  highest-status manual occupations, such  as  foremen, 
printers,  electricians,  and  plumbers,  and  10  per  cent  had  at-
tended college.  Many were  trying to raise  their children for mid-
dle  class  careers,  and  I  suspect  that  the  proportion  of  families 
who  were  working class  in  terms  of  family  culture  was  smaller 
than the proportion working at blue collar trades-perhaps only 
20  per cent of  the  total  population.  Thus, about  75  per cent of 
the  community  might  be  considered  lower  middle  class,  cul-
turally speaking. 

Thirty-seven per cent of the families were Roman Catholic;  47 
per  cent  were  Protestant-with  Methodists,  Lutherans,  Presby-
terians,  and  Baptists  in  the  majority;  and  14  per  cent  were 
Jewish,  the majority Conservative. This distribution is similar to 
that  of  Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  and  of  the  Philadelphia  met-
ropolitan  are<i;,generally.  The  vast  majority,  66  per  cent,  were 
third and fourth generation Americans;  28  per cent were second 
generation  (native  born of foreign  parents)  and 6  per cent were 
foreign  born.  Thirty-seven  per cent reported  being of  Northern 

•  24  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

European  origin  (English,  German,  or  Scandinavian);  17  per 
cent were  Eastern  European  (mostly  Russian  Jewish with a  scat-
tering 'of  Poles);  10  per cent,  Irish;  9  per  cent,  Southern  Euro-
pean  (mainly Italian), and  the remainder a  heady mixture of all 
of these  backgrounds.  Most came from  acculturated homes,  how-
ever,  with  little  evidenc~ of  ethnic  culture  remaining  except 
among Jews and a  handful  of Greeks,  Chinese,  and Japanese.  In 
1964,  less  than  1  per cent of  the  population  was  Negro,  most  of 
these  families  having  moved  in  after  my  study  was  completed. 

MAJOR  SUBCULTURES  AMONG  THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Statistics do not provide a  complete  picture of the  Levittowners 
and  how  they  vary,  and  figures  must  be  fleshed  out  by  ethno-
gTaphic  description.  Age  and  life-cycle  position  are  important 
sources  of diversity  in American  society,  but most  Levittowners 
are young couples.  Given  the declining influence on behavior of 
regional  origin, religious preference, and ethnic background, the 
crucial  source  of  variety  in  Levittown  is  class  and  class  subcul-
ture. 

Classes  are  strata-with-subcultures  that  grow  out  of  the  struc-
ture of the national  economy and society.5  By  class  subcultures  I 
mean sets of responses  that have developed out of people's efforts 
to cope with the opportunities, incentives, and rewards, as well as 
the  deprivations,  prohibitions,  and  pressures,  which  the  natural 
environment and society offer to them. 

From  another  perspective,  subcultures  are  predispositions  to 
behavior, ways  of acting to be followed  when the social  situation 
permits  it.  For  example,  the  desire  for  community  activity  is  a 
major source of differentiation between lower middle and upper 
middle class  subcultures.  People of  the latter class  are  more  pre-
disposed  to  routine  involvement  in  civic  ventures;  those  of  the 
former  participate  only  when  there  is  a  political  threat  to  their 
homes  and families  or when  occupational  roles  require  it,  as  in 
the case of a  lawyer or insurance salesman who must advertise his 
services  through  community activities  in  order  to  earn  a  living. 
The social  situations with which  people must cope and the roles 
they  normally  play  are,  of course,  the  most  important  determi-
nants  of  behavior,  but  cultural  predispositions  help  to  explain 
why  people  act  differently  in  the  same  social  situation  or  role. 
Finally,  subcultures  are  aggregates  of  predispositions,  so  that 

The  Levittowners-and  Why  They  Came 

•  25  • 

where  one  is  found  (for  example,  civic  activity),  another  (buy-
ing gourmet  foods  or  reading  a  magazine  like  Harper's)  is  also 
likely  to  be  present.  Predispositions  are  related  or  aggregated, 
sometimes into a fairly stable system, because the situations which 
people face  and the responses  they make are often similar, and it 
is  these  similarities  which  are  estimated  when  class  is  measured 
by  income,  occupation,  or  education.  At  one  time,  occupation 
was  an easy clue  to the rest of a  person's culture,  but among the 
Levittowners  education  is  probably  the  best  index,  for  years  of 
schooling  and  the  quality  of  the  school  attended  influence 
strongly  the  job  for  which  a  person  is  eligible,  the  amount  of 
money he  has  to  spend,  the  kind  of woman  he  marries,  and  the 
way he and his family will spend their leisure hours. 

The  people  who  came  to  Levittown  may  be  distinguished  as 
"belonging"  to  three  major  class  subcultures,  which  can  be 
labeled  as  working  class,  lower  middle  class,  and  upper  middle 
class.  They must be described in very general  terms,  ignoring for 
the  sake  of clarity  the  many  nuances and  diversities  which  each 
individual, by virtue of his upbringing and experience, expresses 
in  acting  upon  his  own  predispositions.  At  best,  then,  the  de-
scriptions  that  follow  are  brief  profiles;  at  worst,  they  are  only 
stereotypes. 6 

The Working Class 

The way of life I call "working class subculture" is  to be found 
not  only  among  blue  collar  workers,  but  also  among  lower-
echelon  white  collar  workers  and  among  people  who  did  not 
graduate  from  high  school.  In  the  white  population,  many  are 
Catholics,  and  of  Irish,  Italian,  and  Southern  or  Eastern  Euro-
pean  peasant  backgrounds.  The vestiges  of  this  origin  are  espe-
cially  strong  in  family  life.  The  typical  working  class  family  is 
sexually segregated.  Husbands and wives exchange love and affec-
tion,  but  they  have  separate  family  roles  and  engage  in  little  of 
the  companionship found  in  the  middle  classes.  The husband  is 
the breadwinner and  the enforcer of child discipline;  the wife  is 
the  housekeeper and rears  the children.  Whenever  possible,  hus-
bands spend their free  time with other male companions, women 
with other women.  Entertaining is  rarer than in the middle class, 
and  most  social  life  takes  place  among  relatives  and  childhood 
friends.  When  they are not available,  there  is  occasional  visiting 
with neighbors and also a  tendency for  husband and wife to draw 

•  26  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

closer to each other.7  Even so,  it is  significant that the first organ-
ization  to  be founded  in  Levittown  was  the Veterans of  Foreign 
Wars, its predominantly working class membership quickly mak-
ing it a  suburban  substitute  for  the  city's  neighborhood  tavern. 
Parent-child relationships are adult-centered.  Children are ex-
pected  to  behave  according  to  adult  rules  and  are  often  disci-
plined  when  they  act as  children.  Therefore,  the  young child  is 
supervised strictly and  his  life  is  bounded  by  a  large  number of 
rules,  deviation  from  which  is  punished  affectionately  but,  by 
middle  class  standards,  harshly.  The  main  purpose  of  child-
rearing is  to make sure that the child stays out of trouble-that is, 
does not get into difficulties with the school or the police. For this 
reason,  working  class  parents  expect  the  school  to  enforce  disci-
pline. Children react to these  parental demands by seeking to get 
out of the house at an early age and to give up the family  for  the 
peer  group  as  soon  as  possible.  For  some  years  there  is  familial 
conflict  over  this  move,  but,  generally  speaking,  working  class 
parents  give  their  children  freedom  sooner  than  middle  class 
parents do. They often expect the child to get into trouble by the 
time  he  reaches  adolescence,  and  accept  its  occurrence  fatalis-
tically.  By  then  the child,  especially  the  boy,  is  expected  to  be a 
near-adult and responsible for himself. 

Socially mobile working class families attempt to prolong adult 
control,  especially over school  behavior.  Since  parents know  that 
mobility  can  only  be  achieved  by  educational  success,  they  put 
pressure  on  their children  to  do  well  in  school.  Not  being well 
equipped  to  help  the  child,  however,  they  cari  only  continually 
urge  him  to  work  harder  at  his  studies.  Often,  this  kind  of 
pressure  is  ineffective,  and  mobile  families  find  to  their  disap-
pointment  that  the  child  does  poorly  in  school.  In  nonmobile 
families,  children  are  expected  to  finish  whatever  schooling  is 
necessary to obtain good-that is, secure and stable-jobs. By now 
high  school  graduation  is  considered  desirable,  and  if  a  boy  is 
academically  successful,  the  parents  will  make  an  effort  to  send 
him  to  college.  However,  there  are  usually  so  many  opposing 
peer  group  influences  and  other  pressures  that  by  the  time  the 
child reaches college  age  he is  neither able nor willing to go  on. 
Working class  culture provides  few  of  the skills  and  attitudes 
needed  for  organizational  activities.  People  find  it  extremely 
difficult  to accept  the validity of values and interests which con-
flict  with theirs;  they have  trouble relating to strangers and mak-

The  Levittowners-and  Why  They  Came 

•  27  • 

ing  decisions  in  a  group-or for  the  group.  Also,  they  tend  to 
view  political  and  other  organizations  with  the  same  moral 
measuringstick as  the  family,  and  expect  similarly altruistic  be-
havior  from  such  organizations.  This  produces  a  highly  person-
alistic  view  of government  and  associations,  and  when  their ac-
tions are undesirable,  they are seen as  tools of unscrupulous indi-
viduals out for  personal gain.  More generally, working class  peo-
ple  believe-with  some  justification-that  these  agencies  are  es-
tablished to benefit the business community and the middle class, 
and  to deprive "working people"  of their rightful share of goods 
and  privileges.  As  a  result,  they are  highly suspicious of  private 
and governmental organizations and reject them when their aims 
do  not  accord  with  working  class  priorities.  In  a  middle  class 
community  then,  people  of  working  class  culture  stay  close  to 
home  and  make  the  house  a  haven  against  a  hostile  outside 
world. 8 

The Lower Middle Class 

Probably three quarters of the Levittowners follow  the  predis-
position of lower middle class culture. They are some of the blue 
collar workers,  the white collar ones,  and even many of  the pro-
fessionals;  they  are  people who  have  completed  high  school  and 
perhaps a vocationally or a  nonintellectually-oriented liberal arts 
college. 

The lower  middle  class  family  is  sexually less  segregated  than 
the  working class  one.  Husbands  and  wives  are  closer  to  being 
companions,  for  both sexes  have learned to share a  few  common 
interests and to  participate to some  extent in each other's world. 
Since neither man nor woman is likely to have an intense outside 
avocation,  the  home  and  the  family  are  the  focal  point  for 
mutuality.  Partly  because  the  common  interest  is  in  the  home, 
the  lower  middle  class  family  is  child-centered.  This  character-
istic must not be exaggerated, however,  for  the image so  popular 
in the mass  media--of impotent  parents dominated  by  their  de-
manding children-is inaccurate, except perhaps among  families 
from  extremely  poor  beginnings,  who  want  their  children  to 
have  everything  they  missed  and  then  cannot  cope  with  their 
ceaseless  requests.  Most  lower  middle  class  families  are  child-
centered only  to  the extent that the  home is  run for  both adults 
and children,  and  the children are allowed  to be  themselves and 
to act as  children.  At the same  time,  they are  raised  strictly,  for 

•  28  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

parents are  fearful  of spoiling them.  Lower middle class  parents 
play  with  their children  much  more  than  working class  parents 
do.  Partly  for  this  reason,  they  do  not  relinquish  control  over 
their children so quickly. They believe in the value of school and 
church, but do not want these institutions to transform  the child 
or to  make demands  that would alienate it from  the home.  The 
working class  sees  these  institutions as  keeping the child  in line; 
the  lower  middle  class  wants  them  to  support  the  home  and  its 
values. 

In education the lower middle class prefers a modern approach 
without undue pressure on the child, with every child  treated as 
an  individual-but ·not as  a  unique  or  different  one,  as  upper 
middle  class  parents  favor.  Social  adjustment  is  as  important as 
academic  success:  it  is  hoped  that  the  children  will  be accepted 
by  peers  of  equal  status.  Educational  achievement  is  important; 
lower  middle  class  parents  want  their  children  to  go  to  college, 
because  higher  education  is  a  prerequisite  to  a  respectable  and 
well-paid job and a good marriage. 

One reason for  the child-centeredness of the lower middle class 
family  is  that such  a  family  type  is  nuclear-that  is,  consisting 
only of parents and children.  In  America,  the clanlike extended 
family  is  highly valued only in the working class,  in some ethnic 
groups  of  all  classes,  and  for  other  reasons,  in  the  upper class. 
Lower middle class  people still  love and visit  their relatives,  but 
if they are too far away to visit,  they are not especially missed,  for 
lower middle class  people are able  to make friends.  Their social 
life is  informal and involves primarily neighbors and friends met 
through organizational activities. 

Many  lower  middle class  people are also active  in church and 
in voluntary associations.  The church reinforces their view of the 
world as  run  by  morality,  in  which goodness,  kindness,  honesty, 
and  altruism  are  important  motive  forces  to  action,  and  evil  is 
the result of evil impulses. Of course, the church is important also 
as  a source of fellowship;  here people can find  friends  with simi-
lar viewpoints, and of similar class level as well, and without hav-
ing  to  admit  this  aim  as  a  motivation.  Parents  support  such 
organizations  as  the  PTA  and  the  Scouts,  which  uphold  the 
cultural  values  of  orderliness,  self-reliance,  constructive  leisure, 
and above  all,  the  primacy of  the home and its mOTal  strictures. 
People  also  belong  to  purely  adult  associations,  many  still  sex-
segregated,  which  combine  sociability  with  community  service. 
As  in the case  of  the working class,  the  lower  middle  class  nor-

The  Levittowners-and  Why  They  Came 

•  29  • 

mally  has  little  interest  in  government.  The  working  class 
distrusts  politicians  because  they  are  seen  as  enriching  them-
selves;  the  lower  middle  class  is  wary  of  politicians  as  dishonest 
and opportunistic. If government is  immoral, the best solution is 
to keep its  functions and  power minimal;  the  ideal  is  a  business-
man  or a  city  manager  who  will  do away  with  politics  and  will 
also keep taxes low. 

Today,  the  lower middle class  must be divided into restrictive 
and expansive  subgroups.  The former  includes most  Protestants 
and those Catholics (especially of Irish origin) who have adopted 
the Calvinist-Puritan tradition of pre-twentieth century America. 
This  tradition  arose  in  the  small  towns  of America,  and  its  ad-
herents still harbor considerable suspicion of the city and its peo· 
pie,  but especially  of  the  "action-seeking,"  adventurous  working 
class and the urbane and cosmopolitan  upper middle class.  They 
try  to  lead  sober  and  controlled  lives,  with  little  drinking  or 
partying other than the ubiquitous card parties.  Ostentation and 
gaudiness  are  shunned,  as  are  excitement  and  sensuality,  which 
may  be enjoyed only vicariously  in  the mass  media.  The expan· 
sive  group  includes  other Catholics,  Jews,  and  those  Protestant~ 
who  share  their  European,  non-Puritan  origins,  particularly 
those who have moved into the middle class from  urban working 
class and ethnic origins.  Members of the expansive subgroup buy 
more impulsively,  enjoy an aggressively active social life, and are 
willing  to  drink,  gamble,  and  enjoy  openly  the  offerings  of 
modern show business. 

Lower  middle  class  culture  is  often  accused  of  being  overly 
concerned with respectability and keeping up appearances.  This 
is  probably  truer of the  restrictive  than of  the  expansive  group, 
for  the  former  is  essentially attempting  to  maintain a  past  tradi-
tion.  Even  so,  there  is  more  of a  conflict  between  the  ideal  and 
the real  in the lower middle class  than  in  the working class.  The 
latter  has  few  pretensions  about  the  world  and  expresses  its 
idealism  as  cynicism;  working  class  people  have  suffered  too 
much from reality to believe that things could be much different. 
Lower middle class  people,  however,  still  defend a  preindustrial 
moral code which sometimes requires the hypocrisy that has been 
noted in contemporary lower middle class life. 

The Upper Middle Class 

A  small  proportion of managers  and  professionals  have  found 
their way to  Levittown, at least temporarily,  and although  many 

•  80  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

are not yet upper middle class in income or status, they will be in 
years  to  come.  Theirs  is  already  the  culture  of  the  college-
educated,  cosmopolitan  population,  trained  to  be  interested  in 
and  to  participate  in  the  larger  world.  Home  and  family  are 
somewhat  less  important  to  this  than  to  the  other  classes.  The 
upper middle class  family has shed almost all  sexual segregation, 
for college attendance has  trained women  for  organizational and 
occupational skills which they can and want to pursue even while 
being  mothers  and  housewives.  The  wife  still  does  the  house-
work-though she  is  likely  to  have  domestic  help  to  release  her 
for other activities-but many of the child-rearing functions may 
be  shared  with  the  husband.  Interests  other  than  those  of  the 
home can also be shared by the spouses and, conversely,  each can 
have interests that take them away from the home. One-but not 
the only one--of the shared interests  is  the children. The upper 
middle class  is  concerned with  the development of the child as  a 
unique  individual,  one  who  can  perform  autonomously  in  all 
spheres of life valued by  the  upper middle class,  especiaily a  re-
warding  professional  career.  In  order  to  achieve  these  aims, 
parents  provide  direction  for  the  lives  of  their children,  so  that 
while  family  life  is  child-centered,  it is  also  adult-directed.  The 
children are encouraged and even  pressured to do well  in school 
and  parents  are concerned  that  the  scho9l  their children attend 
not only provide a good  education but also  demand a  high level 
of  performance. 9 

Since  most  upper  middle  class  people  (at  least  in  Levittown) 
have  achieved  their  present  position  by  their  own  individual 
achievement,  the  relationship  with  the  extended  family  is  even 
more tenuous than in the lower middle class.  Upper middle class 
people are good at making friends,  and choose them on the basis 
of shared interests.  There is a considerable amount of social  life, 
although the parties and entertaining may be devoted as  much to 
shop talk and civic affairs as  to the gossip and small talk that con-
stitute the staple of social  conversation among other groups. 

Upper  middle  class  people  participate  not  only  in  voluntary 
associations but· in  the entire community. As cosmopolitans,  they 
want to shape the community by national values  which  may  not 
respect local  traditions. 1° For example, they are less  interested in 
having  the  school  system  be superior  to  that of nearby commu-
nities than  in  making sure  that foreign  languages  are  taught  in 
the  elementary grades.  For  this  population,  community  partici-

The  Levittowners--and  Why  They  Came 

•  31  • 

pation  is  almost  a  cultural  duty.  Although  upper  middle  class 
people  are as  distrustful  of  politicians  as  others,  they  have  both 
the  skills and  the status  to  become  involved  in government and 
to fight for what they think is desirable. Needing the community's 
public institutions  to provide cosmopolitan educational  and cul-
tural services that cannot be made available at home, they favor a 
high  level  of  public  expenditure,  to  be  parceled  out  by  well-
educated, nonpartisan political leaders of their own class. 

Upper middle class  culture can  also  be  divided  into  two  sub-
groups  which  might  be  called  conservative-managerial  and  lib-
eral-professional. The former is often  thought of as  "the business 
community,'' and  its  people are  likely  to  be  politically  and  cul-
turally conservative. The latter are frequently Jewish, and politi-
cally and culturally liberal, and are employed in the community-
centered  professions  such as  education and social  work.  In some 
ways,  the distinction  between the two groups is similar to the re-
strictive and expansive distinction in the lower middle class.  The 
conservative-managerial  upper  middle  class  has  also  come  from 
Protestant  origins,  although  its  behavior  is  less  restrictive.  The 
liberal-professional  upper middle class  is  unusually active  in  the 
community.  Aside  from  its  personal  interest  in good  schools--a 
characteristic  it shares  with  the managerial  group--it also  fights 
for  well-known  liberal  causes such  as  better race  relations,  com-
munity  planning,  mental  health,  and  the  United  Nations.  In-
deed,  it is  much  more cosmopolitan  than  the managerial  group, 
more  sensitive  to  "ideas"  in  the  abstract  and  to  national  issues 
than the latter. The managerial group may often oppose the pro-
fessional  group  here,  for  the  former,  being allied  with  business, 
favors low taxes and opposes the liberalism that is  inherent in the 
cosmopolitan stance.  Liberal-professionals are the main audience 
for high culture. They go  to concerts, plays, and museums in the 
big cities;  they organize lectures, art exhibitions, and visits  from 
famous performers in the suburbs. The managerial group is more 
likely to put its energies into golf and the country club which the 
liberal-professionals shun. 

MOVING TO LEVITTOWN 

Most  New  Jersey  Levittowners  who  bought  in  the  first  two 
years--77  per cent altogether-<:ame from  the Philadelphia met-
ropolitan  area,  nearby  New  Jersey  counties,  and  the  states  sur-

•  32  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

rounding  New  Jersey.  Almost  half  (46  per cent)  had  previously 
lived in what they described as  suburban neighborhoods  (includ-
ing 8 per cent from  Levittown, Pennsylvania); a  third came from 
urban  areas  (19  per  cent  from  Philadelphia);  and  19  per  cent 
came from  small  towns.  (The rest came from  farms  or from army 
camps,  here and abroad.) Although  6o  per cent had been renters 
before,  only  39  per  cent  moved  to  Levittown  from  apartments; 
for  53  per cent Levittown was  their first  house purchase, and for 
another  32  per  cent,  their  second. 11  Many  purchasers  were 
mobile,  the  median  Levittowner  having  moved  once  for  every 
two  and  a  half  years  of  married  life,  and  17  per  cent,  once  for 
every  year of marriage.  Some  were ·quite stable,  however,  13  per 
cent  having  moved  less  than  once  for  every  five  years  of  mar-
riage.12 

People's  reasons  for  moving  to  Levittown  were  primarily  the 
need  for  more  spacious  housing  and  the  desire  to  own  a  free-
standing  house-"to  own  our  own  home,"  as  many  put  itP 
Table  1 shows  that  these  reasons,  together  with  transfers  to  the 
Philadelphia area by  the purchasers' employers were volunteered 
most  frequently  as  the  principal  reason  for  moving  out  of  the 
previous  residence. 14  More  important,  the  vast  majority  were 
moving  because  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  housing.  Only  9  per 
cent  volunteered  the  inadequacy  of  the  neighborhood  or  com-
munity  as  the  most  important  reason,  mostly  city  dwellers. 

The purchasers could have moved  to Levittown either because 
they  needed  to  leave  their  prior  residence  or  because  they  were 
attracted  by  suburbia  and  by  Levittown-because  they  were 
pushed or pulled. 15  An analysis of how  they worded  their volun-
teered reasons for  leaving their previous residence indicated that 
more  were  pushed  than  pulled,  55  per  cent  indicating  the 
former,  34  per cent  the  latter.  The people with  the most urgent 
space needs,  large families  and blue collar workers,  were  pushed 
most  often,  but  only  among  childless  couples  did  those  pulled 
outnumber  those  pushed.  Even  apartment  dwellers  and  ten-
ants,  who  might  have  been  expected  to  want  home  ownership, 
were  pushed more often  than  they were pulled,  indicating again 
that  the need for  space  was  more urgent than all  the  possible at-
tractions  of suburbia in  explaining why  people moved  to  Levit-
town. 

The major  reason  for  choosing  Levittown  specifically,  people 
explained,  waa  that  it  offered  "the  best  house  for  the  money"; 

PRINCIPAL  REASON  FOR  MOVING  FROM  PREVIOUS  RESIDENCE,  BY  TYPE  OF  COMMUNITY 

TABLE  1 

PRINCIPAL REASON 

HousE-RELATED REAsoNs 

Need for more space 

Want homeownership and free-standing house 

Dwelling too hard to maintain, or want new and modem house 
Moving out of parents' house 

Evicted, need less space, etc. 

CoMMUNITY-RELATED REASONS 

Inadequacy of schools,  other facilities  for  children 
Dirt, .noise, other physical inadequacies 
Racial change in neighborhood 

Other dissatisfactions with social aspects of 
neighborhood or community 

General dissatisfaction with neighborhood or community 

JoB-RELATED REAsoNs 

Transfer by employer 

Change of job 

Want shorter journey to work 

OrnER 

N 

1 Also  includes people  from  small  towns,  farm_s,_arm1  camps 

PERCENT OF PURCHASERS 

Previous Community 

Urban 

Allt 

6o 
-
24 

17 

_!..!! 

9 
4 
6 

2 

2 

4 

l 

10 

19 

11 

7 
l 

2 

-
(170) 

Suburban 
2! 
27 

21 

-

4 
2 

4 

6 

1 

l 

0 

l 

ll 

.1! 

17 

11 

6 

2 

-
(238) 

58 

26 
18 

7 
4 
ll 

__!! 

l 

l 

1 

1 

5 

15 

9 
5 

4 

(520) 

~ 

•  34  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

that is, a new single-family house which was the best value within 
their price range. 16  Many had  shopped around,  52  per cent hav-
ing inspected  ten  or more  other developments,  and  38  per cent 
having looked  at houses for  from  one to five  years  before buying 
in "Levittown.  Table  2  describes  in  more detail  their reasons for 
choosing Levittown. Eighty-four per cent came primarily because 
of factors  relating  to  the  house;  only a  few  considered  the  facil-
itie~ and social  quality of  the community their major reason  for 
coming.  No one volunteered as  a reason  for  purchase the mixing 
of house  types,  and  even  the availability of schools at time of ar-
rival was  mentioned by less  than 0.5  per cent. When people were 
asked  to  check a  list  of "other reasons"  for  moving,  however,  84 
per cent  checked  off  th~ availability  of schools;  81  per  cent,  of 
pools;  and  87  per  cent,  of  shopping.  Seventy-two  per  cent  ap-
proved the mixing of house  types,  but only 44 per cent,  the 6500 
square  foot  lots,  and  no  more  than  40  per  cent  considered  the 
kinds of neighbors they could expect in Levittown as a reason for 
buying there.  Clearly,  some  features  of  the community were not 
unimportant,  but  they  were  hardly  the  most  important  reason 
for buying in Levittown. 

Although husbands and wives generally agreed on the need for 
the  move,  the men more often decided on  Levittown,  largely for 
reasons  of economy,  whereas  the women  seem  to  have  wanted  a 
more  expensive  community. 17  Even  so,  for  an  estimated  So  per 
cent  of  the  buyers,  the  move  meant  an  increase  in  housing  ex-
penditures.  Roughly  speaking,  it  cost  $125  to  $150  a  month  to 
buy in Levittown during the early years,  and $140  to $165 when 
taxes  rose  later. 18  On  the  average,  Levittowners  were  paying 
about  33  to 50 per cent more for  housing than before. Still,  they 
were  not  paying  very  much;  the  median  Levittowner  devoted 
only about  15  per cent of his income  to housing before  the move 
and about  21  per cent afterwards,  well  within  the  20  to  25  per 
cent  generally  considered  reasonable  by  the  experts.  However, 
among  the  21  per  cent  earning  less  than  $5500,  those  without 
other sources of funds must have been paying at least 28  per cent 
of  their  income  for  the  new  house,  and  they  were  confronted 
with  financial  problems  when  living  costs  and  taxes  went  up. 
Many of the  buyers had come  to  Levittown  to settle down. At 
the  time of arrival,  44  per cent said  they  intended  to settle  per-
manently;  20  per cent  knew  already  they  would  be  transferred 
again  by  their  employers;  12  per cent  thought  they  wanted  to 

The  Leoittownera--and  Why  They  Came 

•  35  • 

TABLE! 

PRINCIPAL REASON FOR BUYING IN LEVITrOWN, 
BY 'IYPE OF PREVIOUS COMMUNITY 

PERCENT OF PUJI.CHASERS 

Previous Community 
Urban 

Suburban  Alll 

PRINCIPAL REASON 

HousE-RELATED REAsoNs 

Value:  "Best house for the money" 
Low price. 
Low down payment 
Amount of space 
MQdernity, other qualities of house 

CoMMUNITY-RELATED REAsoNs 

Provision of schools 
Playgrounds, pools, other facilities 

for children 

Shopping, other facilities for adults 
Neighbors, other social aspects of 

community 

JOB-RELATED RE.ASONS 

Journey to work 
Business and professional opportu-

nity in Levittown 

OTHER 

N 

as 

48 
16 
6 

• 

15 

2 
• 

I 

• 

1 

2 
4 

1 

2 
(159) 

84 

48 
11 

7 
1 

7 
• 
• 

-

0 

1 

1 

-

8 

6 

• 

6 

-
(112) 

84 

48 
16 

7 
• 

11 

_! 
• 

1 
1 

1 

-

8 

6 

I 

...! 
(484) 

•  Less ¢-an 0.5  per cent 
• Also  includes people  from  lllllall  towns,  farms,  army camps 

move  again,  hopefully  to  a  more  expensive  house;  and  24  per 
cent were undecided.18 Those whose plans were firm at this stage 
can be divided into Settlers, 57  per cent; Transients, 27  per cent; 
and Mobiles,  16  per cent. The Settlers were somewhat older than 
the average Levittowner, with more children, lower incomes, and 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

less  education. Only 13  per cent had gone to college, compared to 
So  per cent of the Mobiles and Transients;  40 per cent were blue 
collar workers,  but only  12  per cent of the Mobiles were;  and 13 
per  cent  were  professionals,  as  compared  to  31  per  cent  of  the 
Mobiles and  21  per cent of the Transients.  Forty-two per cent of 
the Settlers were Catholics, whereas 65  per cent of the Transients 
were Protestants, indicating the extent to which  the armed forces 
and the large national corporations still select or attract from  the 
latter religious  group.  The Settlers come by  the label  rightfully; 
on I y half had recorded a  move for  every  three years  of marriage, 
as  compared  to  83  per cent of the  Mobiles and fully 91  per cent 
of  the  Transients.  In  fact,  78  per  cent  of  the  Transients  had 
moved at least once for every two years of marriage. 

(These data  would  suggest  that  in  the  long  run,  if  the  Tran· 
sients  and  Mobiles  do  leave  and  are  not  replaced,  Levittown 
could  become  a  predominantly  working  class  community.  Al-
though  this  may  be  taking  place  in  the  first  of  the  Levittowns, 
now almost  twenty years old,  it is  too early  to tell whether it will 
happen  in  Levittown,  New  Jersey,  particularly since  the  rise  in 
house  prices  during  the  1g6os  attracted  a  somewhat  higher-
income population than the initial arrivals I  studied.20) 

The  Move  from  City to  Suburb 

The  third  of  the  Levittowners  who  came  from  cities  or from 
areas  they described  as  urban  neighborhoods were  slightly older 
than  previous  suburbanites,  more  often  apartment  dwellers  and 
tenants,  Catholics, less  mobile, and more likely  to want to settle. 
They moved  out of  the cities  principally for  more  space  and  in 
order  to  own  a  single-family  house,  although  those  who  came 
from  aging  apartments  and  row  houses  placed  special  emphasis 
on  getting  a  brand  new  house  and  having  a  yard  for  the  chil-
dren. 

As Table 1 indicates, they were slightly more impelled to move 
by  community  conditions  than  were  suburbanites,  for  19  per 
cent  of  them  gave  such  conditions as  the  major reason  for  mov-
ing.  Both in their volunteered reasons and in those they checked 
off,  their main complaint was a  general one;  49  per cent checked 
"we  just  wanted  to  get  out  of  the  city"  and  34  per  cent,  "the 
neighborhood  is  poor  for  raising  children."  An  equal  number 
mentioned  lack  of  playgrounds  and  "urban  dirt,  noise,  and 
traffic." 

The  Levittowners-and  Why  They  Came 

•  37  • 

The reasons  most often advanced for  the so-called flight  to  the 
suburbs  were  of  less  concern  to  the  city  dwellers  who  came  to 
Levittown.  Fewer  of  them  than  those  already  in  the  suburbs 
complained about a  long journey to work.  Only 4  per cent vol-
unteered racial  change in the neighborhood as  their most impor-
tant reason, although 20 per cent checked it as  one reason among 
many, and yet others may have been reluctant to do so  or consid-
ered racial change one reason why the neighborhood was poor for 
raising children. Less than 2  per cent volunteered the low quality 
of schools  as  their  first  reason  for  leaving  the  city;  20  per cent 
checked  it  as  one  of  the  reasons-but  that  was  14  per cent  less 
than those concerned about lack of playgrounds. 

Nor were  they leaving the city only to benefit their children.21 
When I  asked the purchasers whether "they would  prefer  to  live 
in the city if it were not for  the children," 87  per cent responded 
negatively  (86  per  cent  of  the  urbanites  and  go  per cent  of  the 
suburbanites).  The college  educated  were  only  a  couple  of  per-
centage points more favorable to the city than those who dropped 
out  of  high  school,  and  sex  made  no difference  at  all,  but reli-
gious  preference  did.  Jews  were  the  most  favorable  to  the  city, 
and  Protestants  the  least:  23  per  cent  of Jewish  women,  19  per 
cent of the men,  14  per cent of all Catholics, and only 8 per cent 
of all  Protestants expressed preference for the city. 

Of course,  this  question was  asked  of a  population  which  had 
just bought a house in the suburbs. Still,  they did not regret leav-
ing the city, nor did they flee  from  it.  And they certainly did not 
move to "suburbia" to find  the social  and spiritual qualities  that 
various  writers  have  assigned  to  it.  They were  not  looking  for 
roots  or  a  rural  idyll,  not  for  a  social  ethic  or  a  consumption-
centered life,  not for civic participation or for  "sense of commu-
nity."  They wanted  the  good  or comfortable  life  for  themselves 
and  their  families,  and  the  anticipated  peacefulness  of  outdoor 
living,  but mainly  they  came  "for a  house  and  not  a  social  en-
vironment." 22 

ASPffiATIONS  FOR  LIFE  IN LEVI'ITOWN 

Although only about a  third of the people who filled out the mail 
questionnaire said they had given "a lot of thought" to what they 
wanted  their life  in Levittown  to be like,  go  per cent of all  mail 
questionnaire  respondents  volunteered  things  they  "especially 

•  38  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

looked f-orward  to about  (their)  life  in  Levittown,"  and  the  list 
of aspirations was  the same for  those who had and those who had 
not  thought  seriously  about  the  future. 23 

Essentially,  they  wanted  more  comfortable  and  modern  sur-
roundings,  but they did not want to change their old way of life 
or to make a  new one in the new community. About half bought 
in Levittown because  it was  a  new community, but their reasons 
indicate they were referring to the new house;  about 40 per cent 
wanted  to  make  some  changes  in  their  lives,  but  the  changes 
listed also had to do mainly with the house. 

The  aspirations  people  volunteered  before  moving  to  Levit-
town,  summarized  in Table 3·  express  the same  themes  in  more 
detail. The largest number of purchasers hoped that a new house 
would give them a more comfortable and less crowded place, and 
that  owning  their  home  would  provide  privacy  from  neighbors 
and  freedom  of  action  and  self-expression.  As  one  respondent 
wrote,  "I  wanted  a  more  casual  way  of  life  and a  less  cramped 
one.  In your own  home  you  can  do as  you  please."  While some 
hoped the new house would enable parents and children to spend 
more  time  and  do  more  things  together,  an  equal  proportion 
looked  fonvard  to continuing their accustomed  family  duties as 
"homemakers" and providers.  In fact,  the desire for newness and 
change  was  limited  to  meeting  new  people  and  making  new 
friends. 

The  major  source  of diversity  in  aspirations  was  by  sex.  The 
men  especially  looked  forward  to  "the  peace  and  quiet  of  the 
country after the day's work," what some called "outdoor living," 
as  well  as  the  opportunity  to  "putter  around  the  house  and 
yard." The women placed most stress on making new friends and 
"having  nice  neighbors."  In  response  to  a  checklist  question  to 
test  attitudes  on various  kinds of social  relations,  So  per cent of 
all respondents checked looking forward  to meeting new people; 
71  per cent,  to  "having neighbors of similar age  and  interests"; 
55  per cent, to "meeting people with different interests and back· 
grounds";  ana  54  per  cent,  to  "having  more  desirable  neigh-
bors."  On all  items, Jews and  Mobiles scored  highest. The desire 
for  homogeneity  was  greatest  among  women,  for  heterogeneity 
among the  well  educated,  and  for  "desirable neighbors"  among 
those with least status--the blue collar workers and  the least ed-
ucated.  Urban  residents  also  looked  forward  more  to  home 
ownership  and  its  consequences  for  family  life  and  relaxation, 

TABLE  3 
PRINCIPAL ASPIRATION FOR LIFE IN LEVITTOWN, BY SEX 

PRINCIPAL ASPIRATION 

PerCent 

Women 

Men 

Comfort and roominess for family members in new house 
Privacy and freedom of action in owned home 
Furnishing and decorating· the new house 
Working around the house and yard, in garage and workshop 
Carrying out  normal family roles: being a homemaker (W): providing for family 

(M); a better place to raise children 

Better family life: more time with and joint activity among family members 
Better sodallife: making new friends, having good and sociable neighbors 
Relaxed peaceful outdoor living 
Using Levittown's recreation and shopping facilities;  enjoying the convenience of 

its facilities 

A new start or a better life; being part of a new community 
Settling down in a community 
Being active in churches and clubs 
Being active in civic affairs; having a voice in the community 
A shorter journey to work 

Other 

None 

N 

•  Less  than 0.5  per cent 

- - - - - - -

25 
15 
4 
1 

8 
5 
10 

4 

4 
2 
1 
• 
1 
• 

15 
18 
1 
10 

7 
6 
5 
7 

1 

1 
1 
1 

2 

5 

5 

7 
u  ~ 
--
(914) 

(864) 

•  40  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

whereas  those  who  had  already  lived  in  the  suburbs  and  had 
achieved  these  goals  anticipated  the  comfort  and  modernity  of 
the new house. 

Altogether,  about  95  per  cent  of  the  respondents  who  volun-
teered  aspirations  hoped  for  improved  individual,  family,  and 
social life;  and less  than ·5  per cent for  identification with and ac-
tivities in the wider community. A checklist question distinguish-
ing  between  different  types  of  community  activities,  however, 
showed  that  55  per  cent  looked  forward  to  "having  a  voice  in 
community  affairs";  45  per  cent,  to  "being  active  in  civic 
groups"; but only 28  per cent to "joining clubs."  Interest in poli-
tical  and  civic  activity  was  greatest  among  the  higher-status  and 
better-educated  residents,  but also  among  the  Settlers  and  those 
who  expected to be a  minority in  the  community-the childless, 
Jews;  and  other  ethnic  group  members.  Those  who  moved  to 
Levittown  as  a  new community and  those  who occupied  its  first 
neighborhood  were  more  interested  in  joining  civic  groups, 
whereas  those  who  moved  into  the  second  and  third  neighbor-
hoods  were  more  concerned  with  having a  voice  in  community 
affairs,  perhaps fearful  that the earliest residents would take over 
the government. Club activity was mentioned more often by low-
status respondents. 2' 

That  individual  and  family  aspirations  were  more  important 
than  community  ones  is  neither  a  novel  finding  nor  one  that 
should be attacked on moral grounds. The same  priorities would 
probably be assigned  by any other group studied,  including even 
the people who  bemoan  the modern lack of interest in "commu-
nity." In part,  the findings  are a  result of the method. The ques-
tionnaire  asked  only  for  the  "most  important"  aspirations.  Pre-
sumably,  if  people  had  been  asked  to  list  all  their  aspirations, 
more  would  eventually  have  mentioned  community  values. 25 
Also,  such  aspirations  are  difficult  to  think  about  before  the 
move,  especially  to  a  new  community  as  yet  without  organiza-
tions. If the same question had been asked after a year's residence 
in  Levittown,  people  would  probably  have  mentioned  commu-
nity aspirations more frequently. 

Nevertheless,  both  the reasons  for  moving and  the  aspirations 
suggest  clearly  that  when  people  move  into  a  new  community 
they  do  so  primarily  for  a  house.  Half  the  volunteered  aspira-
tions,  two  thirds  of  the  moving  reasons,  and  four  fifths  of  all 
reasons for  buying in Levittown were house-related;  to put it an-

The  Levittowners-and  Why  They  Came 

•  41  • 

other way,  for  So  per cent  of  the  purchasers,  the  house  was  the 
major reason for coming. This would justify Levitt's emphasis on 
providing  "the  best  house  for  money."  One  could  even  argue 
that  from  a  market  point  of  view,  the  firm's  site  planning and 
other community  innovations  were  not  necessary,  at  least  to  at-
tract the original set of purchasers. That people did not move be-
cause of the availability of schools suggests not that they were un-
interested  in  schools,  however,  but  only  that  they  knew  schools 
were  being provided and  were  not  particularly concerned  about 
the  quality  of  the  education  their  children  would  be  receiving. 
House-related  reasons  for  moving  and  aspirations  may  have 
been  higher  in  Levittown  than  elsewhere  because  the  Levitt 
houses  were  thought  to  be  such  an  unusual  value.  Even  so,  the 
data  permit  one  to  suggest  that  any  plan  for  a  new  community 
which does  not make  sure  that  the house  is  as  good as  any other 
in  the market area is  bound to run into difficulty,  particularly if 
novel  and  as  yet  unaccepted  ideas  on  community  planning  are 
tried  out.  In  the  last  analysis,  most  people  spend  most  of  their 
time  in  the  house  and  the  community  is  of  secondary  impor-
tance. 

The data also  suggest  that  the  evolution  of  a  new  community 
may  not  be affected  by  the  aspirations  with which  people  move 
into  it.  Being most  concerned  with  individual  and family  goals, 
they will  leave  the development  of  the community to  others,  re-
serving  for  themselves  only  the  veto  power  over  their  actions. 
What actually  happened  when  the  purchasers  moved  in  will  be 
told in the next five  chapters. 

NOTES 

1.  Unless  otherwise  indicated,  these  data  are  from  a  mail  question-
naire returned by  two  thirds  of  the  first  gooo  home  buyers.  Gen-
erally  speaking,  older,  poorer,  and  poorly  educated  buyers  were 
less  likely  to  answer,  and  although  this  was  corrected  for  in  the 
analysis, the findings still underemphasize that portion of the pop-
ulation.  The method  by  which  the  questionnaires  were  sampled 
and analyzed  is  described  in  the  Appendix. 

2.  They were  also  quite like  the  residents of the earlier Levittowns. 
For the population characteristics of Levittown, New York, shortly 
after  the  purchasers'  arrival,  see  LieU  (1952);  for  today,  see  Doh-
riner (1963), Chap. 4· An early demographic analysis of Levittown. 

•  42  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Pennsylvania,  is  in  Institute of  Urban  Studies,  Vol.  I,  Table  54· 
3·  The 1g6o Census showed 71  per cent of the men to be under forty, 
43  per cent  to  be  between  thirty  and  thirty-nine,  and only  6  per 
cent  to  be  over  fifty-five. 

4·  According  to  the  Census,  by  1960  median  family  income  was 
$7654;  by  1962  it was  $8500,  according  to  an  unpublished  study, 
with  13  per cent of  the  families  still  earning less  than  $6ooo.  As 
I indicated earlier, people who earned less  than $5500 had to make 
higher down  payments. 

5·  For the reasoning behind this definition of class,  see  Gans (1g6u), 

6.  For another description of suburban  classes,  see  Dobriner (1963), 

pp.  242-252-

Chap.  2. 

7·  Mogey (1956),  Chap. 4· 
8.  In  this  connection,  see  Rainwater.  For more general  descriptions 
of working class  culture  in  the  suburbs,  see  Rainwater,  Coleman, 
and Handel;  Berger (196o);  and Willmott (1963). 

9·  For a  more detailed analysis of upper middle class  culture and its 

family,  see  Seeley,  Sim,  and  Loosley. 

10.  Merton (1957). 
11.  The  high  proportion  of  renters  who  had  lived  in  houses,  40  per 
cent,  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  Philadelphia  area,  which  is  built up 
mainly  with  row  houses,  so  that  apartments  are  scarce. 

12.  These  figures  underestimate  the  mobility  somewhat,  for  they  in-

clude only couples married for  three years or more: 

13.  Most  people  wanted  both  ownership  and  a  free-stlmding  house, 
but the desire  for  ownership was  stated more freq\iently  than de-
sire  for  the  single-family  house,  even  among  previ61.1s  apartment 
dwellers.  Of  course,  at  the  end  of  the  1950s,  suburban- bt1ilders 
were  not yet offering "town houses,"  and I did not ask Levittown-
ers  how important the single-family house was  to  them.  However, 
43  per cent checked as  one of  their reasons  for  moving  the  desire 
for more privacy, by which they presumably meant a free-standing 
house. 

14.  These  were  also  mentioned most  often  as  second  and  third  most 

important reasons. 

15.  The  conception  of  push  and  pull  factors  in  residential  choice 
comes  from  Rossi.  His  study,  like  subsequent  ones  of  residential 
mobility,  also  showed  that  space  needs  were  most  important  in 
moving decisions. 

16.  A  1956 study of Levittown, Long Island, reported that 41  per cent 
gave  as  their  first  reason  for  coming,  "the  best  house  for  the 
money."  See  Citizens  Committee  for  a  Better  Levittown. 

17.  Eighteen  per cent  of  the  women  said  they  were  "more  in  favor" 
of  buying  in  Levittown  than  the  men,  42  per  cent  of  men  said 
that they were more in favor, and 40 per cent indicated agreement. 
18.  The figures  vary, depending on the model purchased, and include 
the  cost  of  heating  (which  came  to  about  .Jsoo  a  year)  but  not 
other utilities. 

The  Levittowners-and  Why  They  Came 
19.  After about  three  years'  residence  in  Levittown,  Long  Island,  50 
per cent of the homeowners considered  themselves permanent res-
idents;  17  per cent,  temporary;  and  a  third  were  undecided.  See 
Liell  (1952),  p.  267.  In  a  new  working  class  suburb,  84  per  cent 
of  the  semiskilled  and  a  third  of  the  foremen  saw  themselves  as 
permanent residents,  Berger (1g6o),  p.  20. 

•  43  • 

20.  Dobriner (1963),  pp. 98-102. 
u.  For similar findings in Levittown, New York,  see  Dobriner (19611), 

pp. 64-66. 

u.  Clark,  p.  110,  and Chaps.  3 and 4•  which report strikingly  similar 
findings  about suburban  movers  and  moving  reasons  in  the  To-
ronto  area. 

23.  Interestingly enough,  the  least  educated  and  blue  collar  workers 
had thought more about their future  than  the  well educated  and 
the  professionals,  although other studies  usually describe  them as 
less  able and willing to  think ahead.  The probable reason  is  that 
the  former,  moving  into  what  they  could  expect  to  be  a  middle 
class  community,  would  have  to  make  more  adjustments  than 
other  purchasers,  as  would  the  Settlers  and  those  most  eager  to 
leave  the  city,  who  were  also  most  "future-oriented." 

24.  By  low 11tatus,  I  mean  people lowest  both in educational and  oc· 
cupationallevel, i.e.  blue collar workers and people without high 
school  diplomas.  I  shall  use  the  terms  low  or  lowest  status  here-
after when statistical findings are similar for both blue collar and 
high school dropouts. It should be noted,  however,  that I  did not 
develop  a  single  class  index,  and when  I  use  these  terms;  I  mean 
not  blue  collar  people  without  high  school  diplomas  but  blue 
collar  and  diplomaless  ones  analyzed separately. 

25.  Even  so,  as  the second most  important aspiration volunteered  by 
the  respondents,  the  house,  home,  family,  and  friendship  goals 
turned up as  often as  in the first. 

Chapter Three 

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF 
GROUP  LIFE 

D 

D 

D 

D 

THE  FIRST  LEVITfOWNERS  OCCUPIED  THEIR  HOMES  IN  THE  SECOND 
week  of  October  1958.  Awaiting  them  was  a  township  govern-
ment  which  in  the  past  had  only  to  maintain  the  roads,  and  a 
school  system  which  in  the  previous  year  taught  85  pupils  in 
grades  1  through  9·  The  township  also  boasted  a  Methodist 
church with attached social  organizations,  a  YMCA with  its own 
(but  ramshackle)  building,  a  PTA  for  the  local  school,  and  a 
Levittown Civic  Association,  founded  the year  before  to prepare 
for  the  newcomers  and  to  integrate  them  into  the  existing  com-
munity.  Township  and  county  residents,  most  of  whom  were 
Protestants,  were  eyeing  the  new community with some  trepida-
tion,  because  rumors  had  it  that  many  of  the  newcomers  were 
Catholics leaving Philadelphia slums to escape Negroes, and some 
were  Italians  who  carried  knives.  Elected  officials  were  equally 
fearful,  for  the township and the county had always been Repub-
lican,  and  most  Levittowners  were  expected  to  be  Democrats. 
Even  so,  everyone  was  waiting  to  welcome,  and  if  possible  to 
coopt,  the  25  families  who  moved in  that  October week  and  the 
3000 others who  followed  them  during the  course  of  this  study. 
Among  the  Levittowners  themselves,  the  first  signs  of  group 
life  began  to  appear  even  before  they  moved  in.  As  they  in-
spected  the  model  homes,  many  were  also  inspecting  the  other 
,people who were looking at the homes with them. Those who de-
,cided  to  buy were  called  back  to  Levittown a  few  weeks  later to 

•  44  • 

The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 

•  45  • 

select their lots, and at that time some met the people who would 
live near them.  Most did not, but even so,  they were ready  to as-
sume  that  they  would  be agreeable  neighbors  and  perhaps  even 
good  friends.  Later,  only  g  per cent  recalled  being  "very  much 
concerned about not knowing [their] neighbors beforehand." Re-
assured  by  the  people  they  had  seen  around  the  model  homes 
area and by  the  builder's credit check,  they felt,  as  one man  put 
it, "the people who could afford this type of house would be good 
people."  Besides,  everyone was  looking forward  to occupying his 
new home, and this engendered a spirit of optimism and the trust 
that  other  purchasers  shared  this  spirit.  After  all,  Levittown 
would be a new community, and newness is  often identified with 
perfection  in American culture. 

Before moving in,  only a  few  people were  looking forward  to 
getting  together  with  their  neighbors,  at  least  according  to  the 
mail  qllf.lstionnaire results.  However, once  they had occupied  the 
house  and  had  gotten  it  and  themselves  settled,  they  began  to 
look  for  playmates  for  their  young  children  and  then  to  find 
companions  for  themselves  among  their  new  neighbors.  For  the 
first  two weeks they worked mainly at getting the house  in shape, 
limiting  themselves  to  exchanging  cheerful  hellos  across  the 
street or backyard.  Once the initial nest-making period was  over, 
however, people were ready to meet and,  in this process,  they got 
some help from an unexpected source-salesmen. 

On moving day  the  first  people  to greet  the  new  homeowners 
had  not  been  their neighbors  but  an  unending  parade  of  milk-
men,  bread  salesmen,  and other merchants hoping  to  sign  them 
up for  home  delivery  until  the .shopping center was  completed. 
At first,  the constant callers were a  bother, but when the moving-
in  chores  were  over, .the  salesmen  became  social  intermediaries, 
telling  people about  their  neighbors,  and  pointing out the ones 
with similar backgrounds or interests.  Children,  too,  were a  cata-
lyst.  They were  let out of  the house  at once  to  allow  mothers  to 
get  the  house  settled,  and  immediately  began  to  find  age  mates 
on  the  block.  This  brought  parents  of  roughly  similar  age  to-
gether.  Where such  playmates  were  not available,  or  if  the  chil-
dren  were  too  young,  mothers  would  take  them  in  hand  and 
knock  on a  few  doors  to find  out if children of similar age  were 
nearby. The women  then had an excuse  to  meet their neighbors. 
The  speed  with  which  people  met  depended  in  part  on  the 
season.  VJ"inter  arrivals could not get out of the house  much and 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

in some cases  had to wait until spring,  being lonely in the mean-
time.  But the initial section was  occupied when  the weather was 
still  warm,  and  the  very  first  Levittowners  came  together  quite 
quickly.  Bad  weather  does  not  prevent  socializing;  it  is,  rather, 
that  most  people  need  an  excuse  to  meet  each  other.  The  in-
trepid and extrovert few can go up and introduce themselves, but 
for most people such a  frontal  assault,  with its  tacit admission of 
loneliness and  the possibility of  being rejected,  is  impossible.  In 
good weather,  however,  opportunities and excuses were at hand. 
One could  take  the children outside, and spend some  time with 
them until a  neighbor appeared, or one could work on the lawn 
for  the same covert· purpose. If these methods did not work, peo-
ple could-and did-walk up and down  the street with baby car-
riages  or tricycling children as  a  way  of extending  the exchange 
of hellos to a meeting. Since everyone was dying of curiosity, such 
excuses were acceptable forms of breaking the isolation._ 

The feeling of optimism that neighbors would be friendly was 
not  enough;  there  had  to  be some  sign  that  there  would  be  no 
rejection. Women asked, "Are you settled yet?" If the answer was 
positive,  then  invitations  could  be  exchanged  to  look  at  each 
others'  houses.  Being  settled  meant  that  the  house  was  in  suffi-
cient shape to express the image that the women wanted to create 
among  their  neighbors.  The  men,  knowing  that  they would  be 
less  dependent  on  their  neighbors  for  social  activities,  could  be 
more casual,  although  they did  help their wives,  working on  the 
front  lawn  to  make  sure  that  the  image  outside  was  as  good  as 
that inside. 

Once the image was ready, and an initial meeting produced no 
rejection,  people were  prepared  to  exchange  information  and  to 
look for common backgrounds or interests that would bind them 
together.  They described where they had come from, and their-
or  their  husbands'--occupations,  and  went  on  to  cover  child-
rearing  methods  and  plans  for  fixing  the  house  (women),  the 
lawn,  cars,  and  work  (men).  Every  topic  served  either  to  bring 
people closer together or to pull them apart, by indicating where 
differences existed and what topics were taboo.  For example, one 
of my neighbors was an Army pilot, and on our initial meeting-
produced  by  a  washout  on  our  front  lawn~we exchanged  oc-
cupations.  After I  mentioned being a  professor,  he made a  crack 
about another neighbor, a blue collar worker, to indicate that, al-
though he referred to himself as "a glorified truck driver" he was, 

The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 

•  47  • 

nevertheless, a  white collar worker like me.  He went on by talk-
ing about a  relative  who  was  studying for  his  Ph.D.,  but,  aware 
that  most  professors  were  liberal  and  agnostic,  he  also  let  me 
know  that  he  shared  Southern  race  attitudes  and  was  a  funda-
mentalist  Baptist.  Disagreements  would  surely  come  up  about 
race and religion, and if we were to be good neighbors, these sub-
jects should not be discussed. 

After  the  first  bits  of  personal  and  family  information  had 
been  exchanged,  adjacent  neighbors  traded  invitations  to  come 
in for coffee.  H a  social  entrepreneur had  moved onto  the  block, 
there might even be a  block party, but as  a  rule, large gatherings 
needed another rationale so as  to leave enough social distance be-
tween  potentially  incompatible  people.  One  such  device  was  a 
card party; another was a party at which a  national manufacturer 
of plasticware or small appliances exhibited and sold  his products 
to  a  group  of  invited  women.  Although  the  hostess  of  such  a 
party might appear to trade on her social  contacts in order to ob-
tain material benefit-she received free  products for  holding the 
gathering-it was never interpreted in this fashion.  "It gives me a 
chance to meet people I've wanted to meet," one such hostess ex-
plained. "It's just not right to go up to someone  to say  I  want to 
meet  you;  that  you  only  do ,with  next-door  neighbors.  I'm  not 
out  to  make  money;  it's  just  an  excuse  for  partying."  On  the 
blocks that settled later,  people got together after attending com-
munity-wide meetings or were introduced  to  each other through 
the charity fund drives. These were usually run by  women expe-
rienced  in  community activity  or  by  those  who could  knock  on 
doors without  trepidation,  but even  for  the  less  courageous, col-
lecting for the heart or cancer fund was an entree and, of course, 
a  chance  to  meet  the  neighbors.  Finally,  such  holidays  as  the 
Fourth  of  July,  Halloween,  and  Christmas  allowed  neighbors 
moving in just before then to throw a  party without seeming too 
bold socially. 

All of these occasions were structured to make overtures as suc-
cessful  as  possible.  Initial  rejection  was,  of course,  rare,  for  no 
one could be curt to a neighbor who would be living on the same 
block for several  years. Too much social aggressiveness was out of 
the  question,  however,  for  most  Levittowners  were  uncomfort-
able with "forward" people. 

First encounters took anywhere from  two weeks  to a  month or 
two;  they  were  followed  by  a  period  of  considerable  informal 

•  4B  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

visiting  and  entertammg,  lasting  perhaps  two  to  six  months. 
These visits  provided companionship and mutual support in the 
early period of living in a  new community,  for a  new  house  in a 
still  almost  rural  area  created  not  only  loneliness  but  also  a 
variety  of  problems  which  were  solved  by  getting  together  and 
"sharing ideas." 

Each  contact  between  neighbors  could  advance  people  closer 
to  friendship,  or it could  bring out  differences  that would  indi-
cate that friendship was not possible.  Both alternatives developed 
quickly.  On  one  block  a  group  of  women  had  established  a 
bridge club a month after arrival;  on another, four women  had a 
daily coffee-klatsch  after about  two  months.  On  my  block  all  of 
this happened so  precipitously that by mid-December, one neigh-
bor  could  say,  "I  feel  I  have  been  in  Levittown  for  years,  the 
place is so settled." 

The culture of the block jelled quite rapidly too.  Standards of 
lawn  care  were  agreed  upon  as  soon  as  it  was  time  to  do  some-
thing  about  the  lawn,  and  by  unspoken  agreement,  the  front 
lawn would be cared for conscientiously, but the backyard was  o£ 
less importance. Those who deviated from  this norm-either neg-
lecting  their  lawn  or  working  on  it  too  industriously-were 
brought into line through wisecracks.  When I,  in a  burst of com-
pulsive concern, worked very hard on my lawn at the start, one of 
my neighbors laughed and said he would have to move out if I was 
going to have  "that fancy a  lawn." Since  I was  not interested  in a 
"fancy  lawn,"  I  found  it  easy  to  take  the  hint,  but  those  who 
wanted a  perfect lawn stayed away from  the talkfests that usually 
developed  evenings  and  on  Saturday  mornings  when  the  men 
were ostensibly working on the lawns, so as not to be joked about 
and chastised as ratebusters. 

Perhaps  the  best  illustration  of  the  rapid  definition  of  block 
norms  came  at  a  party  around  Christmas  time.  A  former  New 
York suburbanite  invited  everyone  to  a  stand-up  cocktail  party, 
but  within  an  hour  it  had  turned  into  an  informal  gathering, 
climaxed by a  slightly drunken  group sing.  The almost  immedi-
ate  transformation  from  an  upper middle  class  party  to  a  lower 
middle class  get-together  took  place  for  several  reasons.  Most  of 
the  guests  were  unfamiliar  with  cocktail  parties  and  were  not 
willing  to  stand  up  in  the  prescribed  fashion.  The  hostess  was 
dressed  up  in  bright  Capri  pants,  but  one  of  the  neighbors,  of 
working class  background,  had  never seen such  pants, and  think-

The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 

•  49  • 

ing they  were  pajamas,  concluded  the  party had  been called off. 
Only when  guests  started  arriving did  she  realize  her  error  and 
later everyone,  she  included,  laughed about it.  The hostess'  hus-
band  had  objected  to  what  he  called  a  "Westchester  County 
party"  from  the  start,  and  the  hostess  went  along with  the  dra-
matic metamorphosis  too.  She had not been  putting on airs,  but 
had  thought  her  neighbors  were  like  those  in  New  York.  From 
then on, social  life on the block followed  the norms of lower mid-
dle class entertaining. 

Informal  Clubs 

As  people decided how they  felt  about their nearby neighbors, 
a  sorting  and  departure  process  developed.  Those  who  had  be-
come friends  set up  block cliques,  others moved  into multiblock 
ones, and yet others looked for friends  elsewhere, particularly for 
evening visiting.  The earliest departures  took  place  among social 
and cultural minority groups, especially working and upper mid-
dle  class  people,  older  ones,  and  Jews--and  all  others  who  felt 
themselves  out  of  place  among  their  neighbors  and  needed  or 
wanted  to  find  their  social  life  elsewhere.  With  this  departure, 
the community stratification process began in earnest.1 

Many  of  the  Jewish  women  had  come  from  predominantly 
Jewish areas in the cities and for a significant number, Levittown 
was  the  first  real  contact with non-Jewish  neighbors.  Some  made 
friends,  but many were not comfortable enough and began quite 
early  to  search  for  other Jewish  women.  The  salesmen  helped, 
but the  process  was  immeasurably hastened  by an unpredictable 
factor.  One of the ministers who was  forming a  church  had long 
admired the Jews.  As  he made  the rounds looking for  people  for 
his church, he ran into a Jewish couple who mentioned the need 
for  a  synagogue  in  Levittown,  and  thereafter  he  passed  on  the 
names  of  all  Jews  he  encountered.  As  a  result,  only  five  weeks 
after  the  first  Levittowners  had  arrived,  the  twenty-six  Jewish 
families among them met to discuss the formation of a synagogue. 
The  meeting  acquainted  Jews  with  each  other,  and  the  first 
Levittown  organization  was  set  up a  few  days  later-a mahjong 
club  for  Jewish  women.  It was  not  really  a  formal  club,  but by 
this time the county daily newspaper had added a society column, 
and  the society  editor was  so  short of news  that  she  pounced on 
any grouping and promptly dubbed it a club. 

Another sorting process occurred among a group of women on a 

•  50  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNEilS 

block adjacent to mine. Although people chose their lots individ-
ually, the high proportion of Catholics brought it about that four 
women  of  that  religion,  all  of  them  from  working  class  back-
grounds,  lived  close  to  each  other.  Since  they  differed  from  the 
evolving block culture,  they began  to  meet every day for  lengthy 
coffee-klatsches,  partly  in  common  defense  against  the  middle 
class ethos.  In fact  coffee-klatsch cliques sprang up all  over Levit-
town,  although  not  half as  many  as  the  suburban myth  claimed 
or as  I  had expected.  Women  not of a  minority culture took  oc-
casional  coffee  with  their  neighbors,  but  they  did  not  need  to 
huddle together as closely. 

Some  of  the  coffee-klatsch  groups  expanded  into  block  clubs, 
involving a  dozen  neighbors on adjacent blocks, which  met fort-
nightly or monthly  for  conversation  andjor cards,  with  individ-
ual  members getting together in between.  Some were  formed  by 
enterprising women  who  had belonged  to similar clubs  in  other 
suburbs,  but most  developed  among people with minority back-
grounds  or interests.  They usually  evolved  after  the summer,  as 
block  sociability  waned  and  women  wanted  to  make  sure  that 
they  would  see  each  other  in  winter,  when  people  who  do  not 
visit each other regularly have little opportunity to meet. On one 
block,  it  was  a  group  of  older  women;  on  another,  a  group  of 
women interested in civic activities or in politics; on yet another, 
a  group  of  wives  with  traveling  husbands-salesmen,  pilots,  or 
merchant seamen.  Elsewhere,  it was  a  group  of  Catholic  women 
whose  men  had  become  involved  in  the  organization  of  the 
Catholic  parish and had told their wives,  "You'd better get busy 
if  you  want  companionship."  Indeed,  the  clubs  were  often 
formed  by  women  whose  husbands  were  away  from  the  house  a 
lot.  Most clubs were strictly female,  although sometimes the men 
later formed  card-playing clubs.  One  informal  group,  called  the 
Happy  Hours club,  consisted  of  previously urban and  primarily 
Italian  couples  who  liked  to  stay  up  late  and  complained  that 
their neighbors went to bed at  10 P.M. every nig~t. 

Most  of  the  groups  remained  together  for  at  least  the  three 
years  that  I  was  in  touch  with  them.  Some  had  become  regular 
clubs when the group lost its initial enthusiasm and structure was 
needed as  an adhesive.  Sometimes,  the organization was  involun-
tary,  as  when  the  society reporter from  the county daily wanted 
to write about them and asked them to take a name and become a 
club.  Usually,  the women did not want publicity, partly because 

• sz  • 
The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 
neighbors  who  had  not  been  invited  to  join  would  feel  ex-
cluded. 

Other  minority  group  members  had  a  more  difficult  time  in 
finding friends  close  by and  had  to enter the  larger community. 
Among  these  were  professional  and  upper  middle  class  people 
and,  especially,  college-educated  women.  They  felt  isolated  on 
the blocks, and of course their dissatisfaction separated them fur-
ther  from  the  neighbors.  Their  feeling  of  estrangement  in  the 
pervasive  lower  middle  class  culture  encouraged  them  to  estab-
lish  community-wide  voluntary  associations  which  could  attract 
other Levittowners with similar social  and cultural  interests. 

The Evolution of Social Life 

The  development  of  social  relationships  reached  an  equilib-
rium  rapidly,  for  75  per  cent  of  the  interview  respondents  re-
ported having settled down both in the house and in the commu-
nity within six months,  and fully  half indicated  it took  even less 
time  than  that.  After  two  years  in  Levittown,  47  per  cent  re-
ported  that  they  were  doing  about  as  much  individual  visiting 
with neighbors as  they had after six months;  30 per cent said they 
were  doing  more.  Nighttime  visiting  with  other  couples  in-
creased, 43  per cent reporting more,  34  per cent about the same, 
and the rest,  less.  About a  third indicated the couples  they spent 
most of their time with  were  neighbors,  while  24  per cent men-
tioned  people  they  met in community organizations, and  13  per 
cent,  those  met at church.  Only  20  per cent indicated  that  none 
of their friends  were  neighbors.  The people who did more visit-
ing  with  other  couples  than  after  arrival  also  said  they  visited 
with  neighbors more,  and vice  versa.  About a  quarter of  the re-
spondents reported less  visiting with couples and neighbors  than 
before, however, and these respondents were primarily low-status 
people  with  less  than  a  high  school  education,  and  with  blue 
collar jobs. 

Over time,  the  block social  system  had stabilized as  well, rang-
ing from  close friendship among some  to open hostility among a 
few,  but  mostly  calling  for  friendly  coexistence  and  occasional 
visiting  among  those  who  were  not  friends.  Holiday  parties  in-
creased cohesion  temporarily, and if an accident or illness  befell 
a  neighbor everyone  pitched  in to help as  much as  he could, re-
gardless of how people felt about the family. 

The prevailing equilibrium was  most often interrupted by two 

•  52  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

phenomena:  the  turnover  of  residents  and  fights  among  neigh-
bors.  The  latter  were  not  frequent,  but  when  they  happened, 
they could produce lasting feuds.  Most  squabbles generated over 
the  children.  If children  quarrel-and  they  often  do-parents 
naturally  take  sides.  If one  set  of  parents  feels  that  the  other 
child  is  in  the  wrong  and  has  not  been  sufficiently  punished  or 
that  his  wrongdoing  is  a  result  of  what  it  considers  poor  pa-
rental  supervision,  the children's conflict  is  likely to  become one 
between parents. This may continue long after the children have 
forgotten  the fight.  Parental conflicts,  of course, expressed deeper 
disagreements between neighbors;  friends do not fight  over their 
children's  battles.  Sometimes  there  was  an  eventual  reconcilia-
tion,  but often  people  just stopped  talking  to  each  other. 

Turnover was  then  slight  and stemmed  largely  from  transfers 
by employers, but if the relationship with neighbors had been in-
tense,  the family who  took over the house was  not invited to join 
the group. If ties were  less close and the newcomer amicable and 
of similar age and background, she was  usually welcomed. As  one 
pointed out, "I had to push a little at first  to get people to talk  to 
me,  but  now  there's  no  problem.  There  isn't  much  coffee-
klatsching here,  we  are all  too  busy  cleaning.  But  I'm pregnant, 
and  the  gal  next  door  just  had  a  baby  too,  so  that  made  for  a 
common interest." 

The arrival of a baby was always an event in Levittown-where 
it was  an everyday occurrence-and there was  likely to be a  baby 
shower and renewed interest in the mother among the neighbors. 
A  first  pregnancy  also  incorporated  old-time  residents  into  the 
block  society.  One  of  my  neighbors  had  worked  prior  to  her 
pregnancy,  and  had  not  been around for  the weekday  exchange 
of coffee  visits.  When  the  baby came,  she  was  at once  visited  by 
another  neighbor,  also  pregnant,  and  then  became  part  of  the 
block,  even  though  it had  been  two  years  since  they  had  all  ar-
rived. 

THE FOUNDING OF VOLUNTARY  ASSOCIATIONS 

In  a  new  community,  organizations  can  be  started  by  outsiders 
or by residents,  that is, by external or internal initiative. The res-
idents  can  act  intentionally  to  achieve  community  aspirations 
held  before  arrival,  or  unintentionally,  responding  to  commu-
nity conditions of  the  moment.  This suggests  three  types  of ori-

The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 

•  53  • 

gin:  External,  Internal-Intended,  and  Internal-Unintended. 2 
For simplicity's sake,  I  will  call  the first  External,  the  second In-
ternal, and the third Unintended. 

In  Levittown, almost a  third  of all  organizations set  up in the 
first two years were External. These were usually branches of na-
tionwide  associations,  especially  service  clubs,  veterans'  groups, 
and  women's  social  clubs.  Since  Levittown's  opening  had  been 
widely  heralded  for  some  time,  and  a  community  of  12,ooo  or 
more  families  were  expected,  the  associations  saw  a  golden  op-
portunity to expand their roster of branches and members. Some 
used  professional  organizers  who  go  from  community  to  com-
munity,  but  most  asked  or  encouraged  branches  in  nearby 
towns  to  organize  their  new  neighbor.  Many  associations  give 
annual  awards  to  the  local  branches  which  set  up  the  most  new 
groups  and  enroll  the  most  new  members,  and  the  winners  ob-
tain  increased  political  strength  within  the  national  association. 
Indeed, a man who wants to be a national or state officer  in a  ser-
vice  or veterans'  club  is  materially aided  in  his  rise  up  the  hier-
archy  by  getting  a  reputation  as  a  "starter."  This  incentive  ex-
tends  to professional  organizers as  well.  Almost  two  years  before 
Levittown  opened,  national  Boy  Scouts  headquarters  had  re-
quested the county office  to start tooling up for forming troops in 
Levittown.  A  young executive was  added  to  the county staff;  he 
had taken a  pay cut to come,  knowing full  well  that he  would be 
able  to  organize many troops,  thereby  enhancing his  chances  for 
rapid career advancement in the future. 

Most  organizations  waited  until  the  community  was  settled, 
but  then  went  into  action  quickly  in  the  hope  of  bringing  the 
potential leaders and active participants among the Levittowners 
into their group before others had a  chance  to attract them.  As  a 
result,  the  Veterans  of  Foreign  Wars  (VFW)  arrived  on  the 
scene  after  only  three  months,  when  Levittown  had  barely  two 
hundred families,  and the Lions,  Kiwanis, and the Junior Cham-
ber of Commerce  followed  shortly afterwards.  Later,  O.R.T.  (a 
Jewish women's service  organization),  4-H,  a  B'nai  B'rith  Lodge 
for  men,  a  county  hospital  auxiliary,  a  civil  defense  group,  the 
Optimists  (a  men's  service  club),  B'rith  Sholom  (a  Jewish  fra-
ternity),  and  the  American  Legion  were  founded  in  a· similar 
manner. 

The Internal  method  of organization  was  used  principally  by 
women~s groups, with a  Levittowner who had been active  in  the 

•  54  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

group in the past and had intended to start a  new branch doing 
so  as  soon ·as enough  potential  members seemed  to  be available. 
The  founders'  motives  varied.  Some  were  looking  for  advance-
ment in the national  organizational  hierarchy;  others wanted  to 
be the first  president of the new group;  but for most,  the organi-
zation  had  become integral  to  their lives.  A  founder of a  Jewish 
women's  group explained  her  initiative  by saying,  "I could  not 
conceive  of  living  without  Hadassah."  Among  other  groups 
founded  in  this  fashion  were  Deborah_,  a  woman's  organization 
supporting a  national  tuberculosis hospital, a  B'nai B'rith Lodge 
for women,  the Federated Women's Club, the League of Women 
Voters,  and  Beta  Sigma  Phi,  a  sorority  for  women  without  col-
lege degrees. 

Externally and  Internally founded  organizations were  usually 
national branches,  but sometimes people who had been active  in 
local  groups  in  their  former  communities came  with  the  inten-
tion of starting one  in Levittown.  A  Texan  imported  the  Lords 
and  Ladie~ Club,  which  held  monthly  dances  at  county supper 
clubs  for  middle  class  managerial  families  who  wanted  but 
could  not  afford  a  country  club.  The  Emergency  Ambulance 
Squad was  initiated by a  man who had been an officer  of one  in 
his previous community. 

Most  local  groups  were  Unintended,  founded  in  response  to 
some  felt  community  or  individual  need.  Usually  people  with 
similar  interests  came  together,  sometimes  accidentally,  some-
times  because  they  were  a  minority  which  needed  to  be  to-
gether,  and sometimes  because  they  could gain  from  formal  or-
ganization.  Several  ham  radio  operators  met  by  sheer  accident, 
having heard  each  other over  the  air.  A  Ham  Club  was  started 
when it became  possible  to obtain civil  defense funds  to convert 
their hobby into a  community service. 

On the other hand, a  number of Unintended groups arose be-
cause  members  individually  could  not  do  without  them,  par-
ticularly women who were  lonely and could not find  compatible 
neighbors.  One  woman  turned  to  the  national  office  of  Pan-
Hellenic,  a  sorority  for  college  graduates  to which  she  had once 
belonged.  Her decision  to  form  a  branch  was  primarily a  func-
tion of class  difference;  she  found  herself uninterested  in block-
club  card games  and  gossip.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Levittown 
Women's  Club,  a  branch  of  the  Federated  Women's  Clubs  of 
America,  was  founded  without  premeditation  by  a  lonely  resi-

The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 

•  55  • 

dent who had been active  in a  branch elsewhere  and had  simply 
enjoyed  her  membership.  In  many  cases,  wives  whose  husbands 
were frequently out of town  became  Unintended  founders.  The 
organizer  of  the  ·women's  Club  and  the  two  neighbors  with 
whom  she  worked  were  married  to  salesmen  or  pilots.  Subse-
quently,  women  whose  traveling  husbands  worked  in  the  same 
firm or line also started groups.  For instance, the local  newspaper 
reported  of  the  "RCA Wives"  that  "from  the  first  meethtg  it is 
evident  that a  lot  of  the wives  whose  husbands are away a  great 
deal are more than eager to constructively fill  their time." 8  Simi· 
Jar  clubs  were  organized  by  the  wives  of  merchant  seamen  and 
Air Force pilots. 

In  other  cases,  the  impetus  was  culturally  based.  An  All-
Nations  club  of foreign  wives,  and  before  that  a  British  Wives 
club, were organized, as were a  dramatic society, a ceramics club, 
a  folk  dance  group,  an  art  club,  and  branches  of  two  national 
groups,  the Great Books Club and the Buxom Belles  (devoted  to 
group  weight  reduction).  In  two  neighborhoods  the  scarcity  of 
baby-sitters  encouraged  the  formation  of  cooperatives  in  which 
women exchanged baby-sitting services for each other. They were 
popular  with  Jewish  women  who  wanted  to  get  out  for  club 
meetings  but  whose  husbands  worked  evenings  in  stores  in  the 
Philadelphia area. 

Community  needs  and  issues  generated  a  number  of  sponta· 
neous  civic  and  political  groups.  Dissatisfaction  with  Board  of 
Education  policies  brought  about  the  Citizens'  Association  for 
Public  Schools;  the  Levittown  Youth  Sports  Association  was 
founded  by  the  police  chief  in  the  hope  of  keeping  adolescents 
busy  to  prevent  juvenile  delinquency;  and  doctors  organized  a 
professional  group  to  protect  themselves  against  the  osteopaths 
who outnumbered them in the area. 

As  the community  matured,  a  number of  Unintended groups 
arose  in opposition  to already established ones.  A  Jewish  frater-
nity sprang up because men wanting social  activities were dissat-
isfied with the existing Jewish men's club, primarily dedicated to 
fund  raising for  the  synagogue,  and  civic  associations  developed 
in the later neighborhoods to defend their interests before elected 
officials who came largely from the initially settled areas.  The ser-
vice and veterans'  groups stimulated women's auxiliaries,  gener-
ally  Externally,  but  sometimes  on an  Unintended  basis  because 
the wives wanted to help their husbands, and share a common or· 

•  s6  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

ganizational affiliation.  Unintended groups also  sprang up in the 
later neighborhoods because  the residents  were unwilling to join 
groups formed  by residents from  the  initial  neighborhoods,  feel-
ing they would not be  welcome by the older residents, or because 
they  thought  they  had  more  in  common  with  people  who  had 
moved  in at the same  time.  Besides,  an ambitious founder could 
organize a new group more easily than enter an established group 
and work his way up. 

The Organizational  Process 

Anyone  can  start  an  organization,  but it  can  only  survive  by 
attracting members,  and for  this  reason  the  organizational  proc-
ess  was  often  the  same.  The  first  step  was,  of  course,  to  get  in 
touch with potential members.  National organizations used  mail-
ing lists  to  find  members  who  had  just  moved  to  Levittown  or 
had  the  school  send  invitations  home  via  the  students.  There 
were  newspaper ads  and stories and announcements  at  meetings 
of other organizations.  But perhaps most successful  was  the prac-
tice  of  enrolling  friends  and  neighbors.  People  who  wanted  to 
start an organization often called on  their neighbors for help,  ex-
ploiting  the  cohesion  developed  on  the  block;  people  curious 
enough  to come  to  a  first  meeting  brought  a  neighbor  for  com-
pany  and  security.  Later  interviews  showed  that  of  the  people 
who had not intended to join groups,  fully  36  per cent had been 
drawn  in  by  neighbors. 4  This  banding  together  affected  the  or-
ganizational process in two ways.  Founders who called on friends 
to  help  them  quickly  developed  leadership  cliques.  This  often 
speeded up the organizing process, but in some cases it led to pro-
tests that the group was run by a clique, and then to rival cliques. 
It also  made  many groups  into virtual  neighborhood clubs,  and 
discouraged  joiners from  other  neighborhoods.  Thus,  new  clubs 
with the same manifest aim, such as  service clubs, appeared when 
new neighborhoods were settled because the previously organized 
clubs were in effect exclusive. 

These  consequences  were  quite  unintended,  for  all  groups 
were open  to any person  wanting to join.  Even  those which  had 
membership  requirements-for example,  service  clubs which  in 
other towns  took only men in retail  business--opened their rolls 
to  anyone  who  was  interested.  The opportunity .to  be a  charter 
member-or an officer-was publicized to get people into the  or-
ganization  and  to  establish  it  as  quickly  as  possible  on  a  firm 

The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 

•  57  • 

basis.  The next step was  the election of officers and development 
of program.  Both stages  also  proceeded with great haste  in order 
to secure  the existence of the organization as  quickly as  possible. 
Once the group was  chartered,  the  program  could be used  to  at-
tract further members,  making available  more people and funds 
to recruit others, expand the organization, and thus guarantee its 
survival. Officers were usually elected at either the first  or second 
meeting,  often  before  people  had  a  chance  to  get  acquainted. 
Ambitious leaders could generally get themselves elected and put 
their friends  into office  as  well,  although occasionally attendance 
was  so  small  that  everyone  present  became  an  officer  willy-nilly. 
Most  of  the  time,  the  wish  to  get  the  group  organized  and 
chartered  immediately preempted  the selection  of the right  peo-
ple for the position. For example, one founder had persuaded the 
newspaper  to  run  a  picture  of  the  elected  officers,  and  the  elec-
tion had to be hurried so that a  slate of officers could pose for the 
photographer  when  he  came.  Another  meeting  was  thrown  into 
an  uproar  by  one  Levittowner  who  argued  that  the  norms  of 
democracy demanded the postponement of elections until people 
knew  the  candidates  and  each  other,  but  those  in  attendance 
wanted  the  organization,  a  neighborhood  PTA,  established  that 
night,  and voted  to  elect  a  slate  nominated  by  the  founder  and 
her friends. 

The  Definitional  Struggle 

The rapidity  of  the  organizing  process  created  a  considerable 
amount  of conflict  in  many  organizations.  These  conflicts  were 
usually ascribed to "personalities", reflecting the inability of peo-
ple to get along. Some were generated by the newness of the com-
munity,  for,  as  one  leader  put  it,  "When  you  don't  know  each 
other, it is hard to separate the workers from  the talkers." 5  More 
often,  the  fights  between  personalities were  actually  definitional 
struggles  about  the  purpose,  composition,  and  program  of  the 
group,  especially  in  organizations  without  nationally  prescribed 
activities.  Probably  the most  important source of differences was 
class.  For  example,  the  VFW,  the  first  male  organization  in 
Levittown,  initially  attracted  both  working  class  and  a  smaller 
number  of  middle  class  people.  From  the  start,  working  class 
members  wanted  a  primarily  social  organization;  the  middle 
class,  a  community  service  group.  The  confrontation  was  rela-
tively  brief,  however;  after a  few  weeks,  the  middle class  leaders 

•  sB  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

left  to organize  the Catholic church. Where such alternative out-
lets  were  not  available,  factions  and  bitter  struggles  developed 
over the election of the second year's set of officers. 

In  one  women's  club,  the  definitional  strug~le was  over  the 
amount  of  innovation  permissible  in  club  tradition.  This  in-
volved  differences  of  age  and  of  class.  The  traditionalists,  who 
were  somewhat  older and  more  restrictively  lower  middle  class, 
wanted  a  closed  group  with  a  statusful  program  of  "culture"; 
the  innovators,  more  expansive,  called  for  open  admission 
and  a  program  of  "community  service."  The  crucial  but  never 
stated issue was  over the admission  of working class  women;  this 
came out when the leader of the traditional faction described her 
opponent as  wanting to run the club as  if  it were-a  firehouse-a 
historical  preserve for  the working class.6  The adherents of open 
admission won, and the leader of the traditionalists retired to set 
up an art club, while the victorious advocate  of community serv-
ice  later  went  into  politics. 

There was  also constant debate over  the speed of organization, 
with  "go-slow"  factions  who wanted  the  group  to  establish  itsel£ 
firmly  before  it  indulged  in  too  many  activities,  and  "go-fast" 
ones  which  argued-usually successfully-that  a  rapid  pace  was 
needed to advertise the organization in order to enroll new mem-
bers.  A  similar  conflict  was  noticeable  in  leadership  struggles. 
Founders were  often  dynamic  and even  charismatic  people  who 
attracted  publicity and  thus  members,  but  then  tended  to order 
the  more  active  ones  around  and  alienated  them.  Whether 
praised  as  "starters"  or  discredited  as  "pushers,"  they  would 
eventually  be  replaced  by  more  diplomatic  officers,  administra-
tors  who  were  able  to  get  people  to  work  together.  Of  twelve 
officers  who  had  succeeded  founders,  eleven  indicated  that  the 
one thing they were doing differently was  "stabilizing the organi-
zation"  or "delegating authority  to  a  much greater  extent." 7  In 
some  working  class  groups,  the  founder  sometimes  lacked  ad· 
ministrative skills and later gave  way  to  a  better-educated,  lower 
middle  class  member  who  was  more  able  to  run  meetings  and 
manage relations with other groups. 

Most definitional struggles ended with  the acquiescence of the 
losing  faction  and  the  gradual  departure  of  its  members.  Even-
tually,  many  organizations achieved  a  measure  of stability,  both 
in number of members and in programs, with  occasional  innova-
tion  in  activities,  particularly  of  the  community  service  variety 

The  Beginning~ of  Group  Life 
that  would  publicize  the  group  anew.  If membership  lagged, 
there were  likely  to  be periods of organizational revival,  sparked 
by  the appearance of a  new leader whose dynamism and willing-
ness  to work enabled him to move rapidly into the organization's 
ruling  circle.  The  new  arrivals  were  usually  people  who  had 
previously belonged to the organization elsewhere. 

•  59  • 

Not  all  groups  underwent  definitional  struggles,  however.  In 
many national organizations, the leaders had been active in other 
suburbs and other new branches and  thus had a  ready answer  to 
the inevitable first  question:  How should we get started? Indeed, 
almost all  groups  tried  to  find  members with  past  experience  in 
new  (or  old)  groups,  hoping  that  their  "ideas"  would  work  in 
Levittown.  Often  then,  the  young organizations relied  on  tradi· 
tional solutions,  although when definitional  struggles developed, 
the voices  of experience were not respected. 

The  haste  with  which  organizations  sought  to  get  started  is 
shown by the chronological  pattern of founding.  During the first 
nine  months  of Levittown's  existence,  when  the  population  was 
small and most people were still settling into house and block,  14 
groups  sprang  up  (not  counting  churches  and  church-related 
ones), and from  September  1959  to June  1960,  when  the popula· 
tion  enlarged  and  more  people  were  ready  to  look  beyond  the 
block,  36  were  founded.  The  peak  had  already  been  reached, 
however;  only  14  additional  groups  appeared  during  the  1g6o-
1961  season and just  13  more in  the next four years--for a grand 
total  of 77. 8  Only a  handful  of  these  failed  to  survive,  although 
some  have  carried  on  with  just  a  few  members.  When  inter-
viewed  after  two  years,  about 70  per cent of the respondents  re-
ported belonging to  at least  one of  these  organizations. 

Externally founded groups and branches of national ones were 
of course  able  to  mobilize  more  quickly,  and  regardless  of  how 
they were  founded,  those appealing to  ethnic or class  minorities 
were set  up earlier than those  appealing  to  the  dominant  lower 
middle class  population.  Among  the  churches,  for  example,  the 
Jews and the fundamentalist Baptists were the first,  and organiza-
tions  appealing  to  lower-status  groups  preceded  those  of  higher 
status. Among the men's groups, the order was exactly in terms of 
status;  the  VFW arriving first,  followed  shortly thereafter by the 
Lions, Kiwanis, and Junior Chamber of Commerce, with the 0?-
timists and Rotarians waiting until the community was  two years 
old.  Higher-status organizations  can  afford  to  wait  because  they 

•  6o  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

know  that  people  will  join  whenever  they  appear,  and  such 
groups even  bide  their time to see  who  the highest-status leaders 
are.  Low-status  groups  benefit  from  early establishment,  for  this 
gives  them  an  opportunity  to  attract  higher-status  people  who 
want to become active immediately. Among the women's groups, 
lower-status  groups  also  preceded  higher  ones,  although  those 
enrolling  a  large  proportion  of  Jews  came  before  all  others. 
Groups with similar programs and appealing to the same types of 
people organized almost en seriatim so as not to be left behind in 
the competition  for  members. 

lhganizational Origin and Residents' Aapirationa 

If the aspirations  Levittowners volunteered before  arrival  had 
guided  the  founding  process,  most  organizations  would  have 
been started  Internally by people to whom  they were  important. 
Civic  groups  would  have  outnumbered  social  clubs  and  both 
would  have  been  surpassed  by  home-and-family-centered  groups 
such as PT As,  Scouts, and garden clubs. 

As  it  turned  out,  however,  only  24  per  cent  of  the  organiza-
tions  emerging  in  the  first  two  years  were  Internal,  31  per  cent 
were External, and the remaining 45  per cent were  Unintended. 
More were social  than were civic-28 per cent were purely social 
and  cultural;  28  per cent,  mixed social  and  service;  and  16  per 
cent, civic.  Only  14  per cent were family-centered,  although  that 
proportion would triple if churches were considered in this cate-
gory.  (The  rest  included  "occupational"  groups,  such  as  the 
Medical  Club;  an  investment  club,  and,  of  course,  a  garden 
club.) 

It is  worthwhile asking,  therefore,  why the groups  that sprang 
up were  not  those  that people wanted before they came,  why al-
most a  third could  be organized  by outsiders who  knew nothing 
about the new community, and whether the large number of Un-
intended  groups.  which  sprang  up  on  the  spur  of  the  moment, 
repr.esented  the  impact  of  community  conditions  on  the  origin 
process. 

One answer suffices  for  all  three questions.  How organizations 
were founded was  ultimately less relevant than what happened to 
them  once  they  were  founded.  No  organization,  however  it 
started,  could  exist  beyond  the  initial  meeting without respond-
ing  to  some  needs  among  the  members  it  attracted,  and  these 
needs were not only more important than founders'  or members' 

The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 

•  61  • 

preoccupancy  aspirations,  but  they  developed  largely  after  peo-
ple had  lived  in  Levittown  for  a  while.  External,  Internal,  and 
Unintended groups alike responded to  these  needs, which  turned 
out to be more social  than civic  or familial;  or to  put  it another 
way,  civic  and  familial  needs  were  satisfied  by  public  agencies 
and political groups, leaving the voluntary associations  to fill  the 
social  needs. 

Aside  from  the few  civic  groups,  which  tried  to  intervene  in 
municipal  affairs,  and  the  men's  service  clubs,  which  provided 
"community-minded"  activities  for  the  lawyers,  salesmen,  real-
tors,  and  politicians  who  needed  to  advertise  themselves  in  the 
community,  the  organizations  were  primarily  sorting  groups 
which divided and segregated  people  by  their  interests  and  ulti-
mately,  of  course,  by  socio-economic,  educational,  and  religious 
differences.  On  the  block,  people  who  shared  a  common  space 
could  not  really  express  their  diversity;  the  community  sorting 
groups came  into  being ,for  this  purpose. 

Men could divide andsegregate themselves on the job, but the 
women had  to do it in the community, and partly for  this reason 
most  organizations  were  sexually  separated,  with  only  some  of 
those  appealing  to  upper middle class  people  providing  "coedu-
cational" activities. The total array of women's groups offered the 
opportunity  for  extremely  fine  sorting.  Well-educated  women 
would  be  likely  to  find  compatible  people  and  activities  in  the 
American  Association  for  University  Women,  the  League  of 
Women  Voters,  Great  Books,  or  the  Better  Schools  Committee, 
and,  if  they  were  more  socially  inclined,  the  Pan-Hellenic  Soci-
ety;  those  with  less  than  a  college  degree  could  choose  from 
among  a  dozen  groups.  Working  class  women  clung  to  the 
church-the Altar and Rosary Society was  the town's largest club 
a year after it was started-or joined the auxiliaries of their hus-
bands'  groups.  Religious  sorting  was  also  available,  for  every 
church had men's and women's groups,  and some secular organi-
zations  became  predominantly  Catholic,  others  Protestant  or 
Jewish.  The Jews  had  their  own  secular  clubs  which  sorted  by 
age  and  class.  Occupational  specialties  were  honored;  ex-nurses 
worked  in  hospital  auxiliaries  and  ex-teachers  became  active  in 
the PTA. One Levittowner even  talked about a  Texas club;  she 
too wanted to be "with her own." 

Organizational programs reflected these diversities. The organ-
izations  of  the  college-educated  stressed  cultural  activities  and 

•  62  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

local  or national  political  issues;  those  of the  high  school  gradu-
ates scheduled fashion  shows and lectures on beauty, home man-
agement, and child care.  The highly educated shunned "gossip," 
their  own  version  of  it  being  buried  in  the  discussion  of  social 
issues.  Games,  always  major  organizational  sidelines,  were  also 
stratified, ranging from poker, pinochle, and hearts up to canasta, 
scrabble,  and  bridge.  Municipal  services  and  formal  govern-
mental  institutions still  being in  a  primitive stage,  most  groups 
combined social  sorting with  a  variety of community service  ac-
tivities.  The upper middle class  groups  put on candidates'  night 
and  community  forums;  the  working  class  groups  concentrated 
on sports for  the children, fire-fighting,  and  Fourth of July cere-
monies;  the  lower  middle  class  groups'  activities  ranged  from 
rolling  bandages,  running  Miss  Levittown  contests,  and  collect-
ing  books  for  the  library  to  helping  the  Superintendent  of 
Schools. 

Needless  to  say,  the  kinds  of  sorting  groups  that  Levittown 
would  require  could  not  be  determined  until  after  people  had 
lived  there  for  a  while  and  could  see  how  many  friends  they 
could  find  on  the  block and what  charitable and  civic  activities 
needed  to  be  supplied.  As  a  result,  they  could  not  have  antici-
pated  before  arrival  what  kinds  of organizations  they  would  ac-
tually  join.9  Likewise,  the  organizations  could  not  anticipate 
their  members'  demands  and  needs  in  advance,  but  once  they 
knew them,  they  adapted to them.  This was  particularly  true  of 
national  and  Externally  founded  groups,  which  developed  new 
functions  in  Levittown  having little  to do with  the reasons  they 
came or with  the aims  in their national charters. 10  These groups 
succeeded  only  because  they  were  able  to  bend  to  local  needs 
when  necessary. 11  For  example,  two  Jewish  national  women's 
groups  became  essentially  neighborhood  clubs  for  young,  man-
agerial  upper middle class  women  and older,  lower  middle  class 
women,  respectively.  Most  of  their  members  knew  little  about 
the  national  organization but simply wanted Jewish companion-
ship.  A  4-H group was rescued  after a  poorly attended organiza-
tional  meeting because  the county agent chanced  on a  clique of 
teenage  girls  who  needed  a  club  to keep  the group  together,  al-
though they were not particularly interested in the 4-H program. 
The  national  groups  were  rarely  aware  of  how  their  branches 
changed in Levittown-but then they did not care particularly, so 
long as they could add to their membership rolls. 

The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 

•  6s  • 

The  Unintentionally  founded  clubs  were  not  much  different 
from  the others.  Although  they  did  not  have  to  alter  themselves 
to succeed,  they too functioned primarily as sorting groups. Some 
were,  of  course,  generated  by  community  conditions,  for  ex-
ample, the Sitters clubs, which responded to the shortage of baby-
sitters, and  a  Juvenile  Discussion  gmup  which  met  to  do  some-
thing about juvenile delinquency.  Sometimes community condi-
tions  hastened  the  arrival  of groups  that would  eventually  have 
developed  anyway.  The  Jewish  community  organized  almost 
immediately  because Jewish women  found  themselves  ill at ease 
with  their neighbors,  and an  institution was  needed  to  celebrate 
Chanukah so the children could be discouraged from demanding 
Christmas trees. 

Yet none of the sorting needs and community conditions were 
so  distinctive  as  to  require  unique  organizations.  The ability of 
national  groups  to  bend  to  local  priorities  helped,  but even  the 
local  associations,  40  per cent of the  total,  were modeled on sim-
ilar  organizations  elsewhere  and  none  was  entirely  original  to 
Levittown.  They  were,  rather,  typical  of  those  found  in  most 
other suburbs and communities of young families of similar class. 
In  fact,  although  they  considered  themselves  community-wide 
organizations,  almost  half  of  thirty-six  for  which  membership 
addresses  were  available  drew  most  of  their  people  from  one or 
two neighborhoods.  Clearly,  people cared less about the nominal 
purpose and scope  of  the group  than  to  be with  fellow  residents 
who  had  come  to  Levittown  at  about  the  same  time  and  were 
compatible in other ways. 

THE STRUCTURE OF ORGANIZATIONS 

As  is  usually  the  case,  most  organizations  consisted  of  a  small 
group of ac1ive  people and a  large  number of members who did 
little  more  than  attend  meetings.  Able  administrators  to do  the 
time-consuming  work  required  by  every  project-even  a  seem-
ingly simple affair like a  bazaar or bakesale required hundreds of 
woman-hours  and  phone  calls-were scarce.  Women  were  espe-
cially  loath  to take  responsible  positions,  and  pioneers remained 
in  their  organizations  even  after  they  had  served  as  presidents 
and could rise no higher.  In  1964,  many of the same people were 
still active in-and sometimes in control of--groups that had been 
founded  in  1959· Any person who  had shown  himself or herself 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

to be effective  in one group was  asked  to  help  in  other organiza-
tions.  Although  some  complained  about  the  workload,  they 
found  it  difficult  to  turn  down  these  requests.12  Saying  no  re-
peatedly. might brand  them as  "uncooperative" or "l;tcking com-
munity spirit,"  and  unless  they  wanted  to  leave  community  life 
altogether,  the  threat was enough to make them cooperative. 

As  a  result,  interlocking  directorates  were  created,  with  the 
same  people or their  friends  holding leadership positions  in sev-
eral  groups.  Sometimes,  leaders  who  were  friends  and  worked 
well  together  even  moved  en  masse  to  other  groups  and  even-
tually became important leadership cliques in them. For example, 
several middle class Catholics-some managers, others salesmen-
came  together  in  the  VFW  shortly  after  the  community  was 
founded.  Then  they  helped  to  organize  the  Catholic  parish,  the 
Levittown  Youth  Sports Association,  and subsequently  the  Holy 
Name Society.  Some also  became politically active,  later running 
for  the  school  board  and  Township  Committee.  Naturally,  they 
formed  alliances between  these groups,  and eventually they were 
defined  as  spokesmen  for  Levittown's  Catholics,  politicians  and 
others  consulting  them  on  issues  affecting  their  coreligionists. 
On  the  whole,  interlocking  directorates  and  alliances  devel-
oped  only  among  like-minded  organizations,  "like-minded"  be-
ing  defined  primarily  by  common  interests  and  membership 
characteristics.  The  small  group  of  cosmopolitans  created  al-
liances  between  the  Citizens'  Aswciation  for  Public Schools,  the 
county Human Relations Council, the League of Women Voters, 
the  American  Association  of  University  Women,  and  even  such 
cultural  groups as  the  Great  Books  Club, calling on these organ-
izations  for  help  on  salient  issues.  A  large  number  of  groups, 
principally  of  lower  middle  class  women,  including  the  PT As 
and the  Federated Women's Club, joined to collect books for  the 
library.  Those drawing from  working class residents (such as  the 
veterans'  groups)  cooperated  on  parades  and  other  ceremonies 
for national  holidays.  The Boy Scouts worked with the churches, 
encouraging  them  to  sponsor  troops,  in  return  for  which  the 
Scout program, as one Scout executive pointed out, "takes the boy 
up  tC'  •.he  steps  of  the  church  and  motivates  him  to enter." 

These  coalitions  were  encouraged  by  the  relative  internal 
homogeneity  of  individual  organizations.  Being  sorting  groups, 
or  being  nationally  affiliated,  many  Levittown  organizations  at-
tracted members of common background, and their leaders were 

The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 

•  65  • 

thus  able  to  bring  them  into  alliances  without  creating  dissent. 
For  example,  the  Federated  Women's  Club  attracted  mostly 
Protestant  lower  middle  class  women  somewhat  older  than  the 
rest  of  the  community  and  with  more  than  average  interest  in 
community  service.  This  happened  quite  unintentionally,  but 
since  it  was  a  national  organization  with  a  set  and  well-known 
image,  Jews  and  Catholics  stayed  out  of  it;  so  did  women  who 
lacked  the  social  skills  they  felt  were  needed  and  those  more  in-
terested  in  political  or  cultural  activities.  Groups  oriented  to 
children's  needs,  such  as  the  PT As  and  the  Scouts,  were  less 
stratified  by class  and religion,  although  they  naturally attracted 
more middle class  members  than working class  ones. 

Joining  with  other  organizations  on  community  projects  was 
considered desirable  because  it  would  create  favorable  publicity 
for  the  individual  groups,  and  thus  attract  more  members.  One 
of  these  joint activities,  the  erection  of  a  community  Christmas 
tree  in  1959,  resulted  in an abortive  attempt  to  set  up a  formal 
structure  of  organizations,  the  Levittown  Community  Council. 
The Council's founding  was  stimulated  by  the desire  to  prevent 
any  organization  garnering  more  publicity  and  credit  than  any 
other  for  joint  projects,  to  coordinate  organizational  activities, 
and  to minimize organizational  competition.  If community-wide 
meetings  and  community-wide  fund-raising  affairs  could  be 
scheduled  so  as  not  to  coincide,  they  would  be  better  attended 
and more profitable;  therefore,  the first-and last-project of the 
Council was  to set up an overall organizational meeting schedule. 
The  participating  organizations  were,  however,  still  so  eager  to 
maximize  their  own  membership,  and  therefore,  to  amass  pub-
licity and credit for community service,  that they were unwilling 
to cooperate in the coordinating venture. Under such conditions, 
there was  no  incentive  for  a  community  leader  or  politician  to 
step forward and make the Council his own bailiwick, and it dis-
appeared shortly after it was  founded.  Later,  the  businessmen in 
the  shopping center formed  an association  which  erected a  com-
munity Christmas tree every year,  staged other national  and reli-
gious  ceremonies,  and  put  on  entertainment  to  bring  shoppers 
into  the center. 

Some organizations had ties to the political system. The PT As 
were committed  to  defending  the  school  system  against  opposi-
tion,  but other organizations  had  a  more  voluntary relationship 
with  politics.  Leading  political  figures  were  also  active  in  a 

•  66  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

variety  of  voluntary  associations  in  order  to  demonstrate  their 
community-mindedness to the voters and to use  the organizations 
as  listening  posts.  Many  of  them,  being  lawyers  and  insurance 
and real estate salesmen, also  had occupational reasons for  being 
active.  Then  too,  it  had  long  been  a  county  tradition  for  the 
major fund drives,  such as  the  March of Dimes, cancer and heart 
funds,  and the annual campaigns by local  hospitals,  to be headed 
by leading politicians. This not only gave  the political parties an 
opportunity to do a  community service,  but also  helped  them to 
find  able party workers.  Some  organizations had more direct ties 
to  the  political  parties.  For  example/ several  VFW  leaders  were 
active Democrats,  and many members of the Junior Chamber of 
Commerce,  Kiwanis,  and  Rotary  were  Republicans.  Although 
these  organizations  had  no official  ties  to either  party,  they  gave 
covert support to party activities,  and  the  parties reciprocated  by 
supporting organizational projects. The political alliances helped 
to  split  the  total  array of organizations  even  further,  so  that  the 
emerging structure was actually an aggregate of competing inter-
ests  and temporary coalitions reflecting  the diversity and conflict 
in the political sphere. 

NOTES 

1.  For descriptions  of similar processes  in other  new  developments, 
see  Danhof;  Infield;  Form  (1945  and  particularly  1951);  Rosen-
feld;  Whyte  (1956),  Chaps.  25  and 26;  and Gutman. 

2.  An  Unintended  organization  could,  of  course,  be  Externally 
founded,  with  outsiders  starting a  group  in  the  new  community 
in order  to  protect  their own  interests.  This explains  the  forma-
tion of  the Levittown Civic Association,  but no  other. 

g.  Levittown Life, July 6,  1961. 
4·  A national study of volunteers for the March of Dimes found  that 
the  largest  proportion,  52  per  cent,  joined  after  being  asked  by 
friends.  Sills,  pp.  102-103. 

5·  Conversely,  a  woman  who  participated  in  a  telephone  survey  to 
find mothers for  the PTA mentioned that she could tell  from  the 
person·s voice and the topic of conversation whether that individ-
ual was "officer  material." 

6.  When Levittown was  racially integrated,  this  club was one of the 
few  which  debated  the  exclusion  of  Negroes,  but  eventually  de-
cided not to do so. 
7·  Michelson,  p.  91. 

The  Beginnings  of  Group  Life 

8.  If the  neighborhood  PTAs  and  the  men's,  women's,  youth,  and 
couples' clubs organized by  the churches were included,  the  total 
would easily  reach  100. 

9·  Later, all belonging to social and civic groups and 73  per cent be-
longing  to  the men's service  clubs said  they  had  not  intended  to 
join  these  groups  before  coming  to  Levittown,  as  compared  to 
only 31  per cent of those in the PTA, the Scouts, and other child-
centered organizations. 

10.  Although  61  per  cent  of  memberships  in  national  organizations 
were intended before arrival, as compared to none in local groups, 
this reflected mainly the willingness of Mobiles and Transients to 
rejoin groups in which they had been active  before. 

11.  Men's needs seemed more predictable;  73  per cent of their groups 
were  intended,  as  compared  to  only  48  per cent  of  the  women's, 
the latter's founding responding more directly to the sorting needs 
that  developed  in  the  community.  Also,  middle  class  founders 
were  more responsive  to their fellow  residents  than  working class 
ones;  56  per  cent  of  organizations  with  predominantly  working 
class  memberships  depending  on  External  founders,  and  only  6 
per  cent  on  Internal  ones.  Among  middle  class  groups,  only  9 
per cent were founded Externally and 48  per cent Internally. 
12.  These complaints have become immortalized as  the  theory of sub-
urban hyperactivity.  In  Levittown,  hyperactivity was  limited  to  a 
few  people,  because  the  majority  were  reluctant  to  become  in-
volved in strenuous organizational activity. 

D 

Chapter  Four 

THE  FOUNDING  OF 
CHURCHES 

D 

D 

D 

IN  AMERICA,  CHURCHES,  WITH  THE  EXCEPTION  OF  THE  CATHOLIC 
Church, are voluntary associations  in that people are free  to join 
or stay away  and can choose  their denomination. As  a  result,  the 
origin  of churches differed  from  that of  secular  organizations  in 
only  one  respect:  most  were  founded  Externally.  Nineteen 
churches  (and  synagogues)  were  established  in  Levittown  by 
1964,  thirteen during the firs_t  two years,  and of  the  initial  ones, 
ten  were  organized  Externally.  Most  of  the  churches  received 
help from  Levitt, who gave  them free  land to  hasten  the erection 
of a building, partly to make the town more attractive to purchas-
ers.  Levittlfi  requirement  that  the  churches  build  a  year  after 
organization  or forfeit  the site  (although  they  could get another 
later)  encouraged External agencies to  take  over their formation, 
although they have also  done so in other suburbs where free land 
was  not available.  Moreover,  the  fundamentalist  Protestant sects 
in  Levittown,  which  were  not  given  free  land,  also  organized 
Externally,  and  the  Jews,  who  were  given  land,  nevertheless 
formed  their  synagogues  Unintentionally.  Other  explanations 
must  therefore account for  the emphasis on External  formation. 
Perhaps  the  principal reason  is  that churches,  like nationwide 
voluntary  associations,  want  to  add  new  branches  and  congre-
gants, and Levittown provided the opportunity-particularly for 
a  group  of  "minor"  Protestant  denominations  (the  Dutch  Re-
formed,  the  Evangelical  United  Brethren,  and  the  Church  of 

•  68  • 

The  Founding  of  Churches 

•  6g  • 

Christ)  which  had long been  losing  ground  to  the  "major"  ones 
(Methodists,  Baptists,  Lutherans,  Episcopalians,  and  Presbyte-
rians).  They hoped  that  they  could  expand  in  a  large  new  com-
munity,  especially  if  they  came  early  to  attract  the  unchurched 
and  those  wanting  to  switch  denominations. 1  The  builder 
wanted  minor  denominations  in  Levittown,  knowing  from  pre-
vious experience  that  they would offer  extra community services 
as a means of attracting congregants. What the purchasers wanted 
was  difficult  to  say.  None  of  the  pre-occupancy  aspirations  re-
ferred  to  church  activities,  although  later  interviews  indicated 
that 71  per cent then belonging to a church had intended to join 
before  arrival,  and  most  Protestants  chose  the  denomination  to 
which they had belonged before, only  13  per cent switching. The 
presence of a  large  number of people committed  to  membership 
in  a  specific  denomination  probably  explains  why  so  many 
churches  could  be  founded  Externally,  and  the  availability  of a 
significant,  though  smaller,  number  of  unchurched  and  "swit-
chers" explains why three minor denominations could be started, 
even  though only a  handful of Levittowners had previously been 
members of them. 

mE PLANNED  CHURCHESz  PROTESTANT  AND  CATHOLIC 
Despite  organizational  and  doctrinal  differences  among  the  de-
nominations,  the  formation  of  new  congregations  followed  a  re-
markably  similar  pattern.  Before  Levittown  was  occupied,  the 
national  or state denominational office  began  to plan.  Most  Prot-
estant  denominations  today  have  research  departments,  and 
these,  using figures  from  other Levittowns  and  similar  new  sub-
urban  towns,  estimated  the  number  of  congregants  of  their  de-
nomination  likely  to  purchase  in  Levittown.  Some  even  pro-
jected how  much  Levittowners could  be  expected  to  donate  and 
how  soon  they  would  be able  to  pay  for  a  building.  Meanwhile, 
the denomination selected a  minister,  often called a  "starter," to 
organize the new congregation. Typically, he arrived in the com-
munity  shortly  after  its  opening and  held  services  either  in  his 
home  or  at  a  school  until  the  church  building  was  completed. 
Concurrently,  national church headquarters continued  the  plan-
ning process and, when the building plans were ready,  ask~d the 
minister to formally organize the congregation,  elect officers,  and 
have  them  review  the  plans.  Once  the  plans  were  accepted,  the 

•  70  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

national  church made a  grant or a  loan  to  the  Levittown  group 
to  enable  it  to  build  a  church  within  the  time  limit  of  the 
builder. 

Although  the  churches  were  thus  essentially  preplanned,  the 
preferences  of future  congregants  had  to  be considered.  For ex-
ample,  the  National  Lutheran  Council  used  data about  the  reli-
gious  preferences  of  young  Lutheran  suburbanites  and  chose  a 
liberal  branch  of  Gennan origin  which  had  lost  its  ethnic char-
acter rather than  the less  Americanized  Augustana  synod  or  the 
theologically conservative  Missouri  synod.  The  plans  themselves 
were  not  implemented  until  they  had  been  reviewed  by  the 
fledgling  congregations  or  their  officers,  who  were  often  Levit-
towners  with  previous  church-organizing  experience.  The  work 
of the External  planners was  usually accepted,  but some congre-
gations questioned  the design  of the buildings.  Many of the lay-
men  and  some  of  the  ministers  wanted  a  Colonial  church-a 
white  frame  building with a  steeple-believing that was  what  a 
church  ought  to  look  like.  Since  the  costs  of  this  design  were 
high,  all  but one of the  churches finally  assented  to the contem-
porary  style  proposed  by 
the  denominational  architects, 
frequently adding a small steeple to it, however. 

But  by  far  the  most  important  step  in  planning  the  new 
churches  was  the  selection  of  the  minister.  Although  doctrine 
holds  that  people must be attracted by  theology and liturgy,  the 
fate  of  the  church  depended  considerably on  the  first  ministers. 
They  had  not  only  to  attract  people,  but also  weld  them  into a 
congregation quickly and persuade them to work and contribute 
funds-and often  they were in competition with other ministers. 
Given  the  looseness  of denominational  allegiances among young 
Protestants,  all  but  the  Lutheran  and  Episcopalian  ministers 
stood  the  chance  of  losing  potential  congregants  to  other 
churches.  Knowing  all  this,  the  denominations  selected  young 
men  who  understood  the  problems  of  young  families  and  who 
themselves  wanted  to come  to  Levittown,  attracted  by  the  chal-
lenge  of  a  new  church  and  a  higher  salary.  The denominations 
chose  well,  because  all  but  two  of the  eight  Protestant ministers 
who  came  were  later  named  to  their  posts  permanently.  The 
other two were culturally too different from their congregants to 
be able to bring them into the church. 

The  Lutherans  and  Episcopalians  organized  their  churches 
after  Levittowners called  the  national  office,  asking  them  to get 

The  Founding  of  Churches 

•  71  • 

started  ahead  of  the  planning schedule,  but almost  all  other de-
nominations began  before any demand  for  them  had  manifested 
itself.  Once  they  had  moved  in,  the  ministers  began  to  go  from 
door  to  door  to  enroll  members.  The  "major"  ministers  had  a 
difficult  time;  they had a quota to fill  in order to start the church, 
and  they  could  recruit  the  unchurched  but  not  people  from 
other denominations_  On the other hand,  the "minor" ministers, 
who  found  only a  few  from  their  own  denominations,  could  in-
vite anyone they wished. As a result, the former accused the latter 
of "stealing" congregants. 

The  minor  ministers  were  also  more  "client-oriented"  than 
their competitors.  They began  to  build  more  quickly,  knowing 
from  past  experience  that  many  people  would  not  come  to  ser-
vices  until  a  building was  erected_  In one case,  the  building was 
begun  when  only seventeen  families  belonged  to  the church,  al-
though  the  usual  lower  limit  was  100  members.  The  minister 
also persuaded  his superiors to build a  Colonial church to-attract 
more  people.  Minor  denominations  organized  women's  and 
men's social  groups more quickly as  well,  even  though this could 
detract  attention  from  the  congregational  organization  or cause 
turmoil  in  the  church.  The social  organizations  being  more  in-
formal  than the church, people felt  freer  to express their dissatis-
factions  about  the  church  in  them.  In  fact,  a  congregant  revolt 
that led  to  the removal  of the  Methodist minister had its start  in 
the  couples'  club.  One minority church started  Levittown's  first 
nursery school  to  advertise  its  presence  and  community spirit-
only  to  find  itself  most  popular  with  Jewish  residents.  Perhaps 
the most successful  recruitment approach was  taken  by one min-
ister who immediately immersed himself in civic activity, was  the 
first  to offer counseling services,  and  by his  self-styled  ability "to 
talk like a  truckdriver" attracted working class residents. 

The mixture of community service and client-centered recruit-
ment enabled the minor churches to enroll a  respectable number 
of congregants.  In  tg6t,  they  each  averaged  100 adult  members, 
compared  to  300 each  among the major churches.  Three fourths 
of the members  of one minor congregation and  half of a  second 
had crossed  denominational  lines after coming  to  Levittown,  al-
though, of all church-going Protestants only  13 per cent had done 
so.  The  minor  denominations  had  also  become  neighborhood 
churches,  drawing  So  per  cent  or  more  of  their  members  hom 
one neighborhood, whereas  the major denominations drew from 

•  72  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

all  over  Levittown.  The minor church  which  had  organized  the 
most  social  groups  had  attracted  twice  as  many  members as  an-
other which had organized none. 

Three  fundamentalist  churches  were  also  founded  in  Levit-
town during the first  two years, by the same External method and 
with  only  a  little  less  planning.  They  were  not  given  free 
land  by  Levitt,  but  because. so  many  of  their  members  tithed, 
they needed only a small congregation to start building.  One was 
collecting  $woo a  week  from  65  individuals  three  months  after 
the church's  founding,  and  was  able  to  build within  a  year. 

The growth of both major and minor churches provided clear 
testimony  that  External  planning worked,  provided  it  was  done 
efficiently.  The ministers chosen  to carry it out understood  their 
congregants,  and  acceded  to  their  wishes  on  matters  of  impor-
tance to them. The willingness of Externally planned churches to 
function  thus  is  nicely  illustrated  by  the  Catholic  parish,  espe-
cially since the Catholic Church  is  often  thought  to be a  central-
ized and monolithic body in which parishioners are  powerless.  In 
theory the state diocese  has complete control over the timing and 
development  of  new  parishes.  The  Trenton  diocese,  which  was 
responsible  for  Levittown,  was  conservative  in  starting new  par-
ishes  and  believed  in  building churches  before  schools,  but  the 
Catholic  Levittowncrs forced  the diocese  to alter  both  the  speed 
and the character of its planning. Led by a young insurance sales-
man  who  went  from  door  to  door  and  registered  Catholic 
families  even  while  he  was  trying to  sell  insurance,  a  number of 
Lev;ttowners  pressured  the  diocese  to  organize  the  local  parish 
ahead  of  schedule,  and  eventually  it  agreed.  It  also  chose  as 
starter  and  permanent  priest  a  man  who  wanted  very  much  to 
come  to  Levittown  and  who,  like  his  future  parisqioners,  was 
more  interested  in  the  parochial  school  than  in .the ichurch.  Be-
cause  the  parish  would  need  more  than  the  three  acres  Levitt 
gave free,  the diocese bought its own eleven-acre site, but on that 
site built a  parochial school  which  included a  "worship area"  for 
Masses. 

Although the diocese gives the parish priest control over parish 
activities,  in  Levittown  he  had  to  adjust  the  organizational  pro-
cess  to  the  Levittowners.  An  usher's group,  functioning as  repre-
sentative of the parishioners,  had been formed before he arrived, 
and Holy Name and Altar and Rosary societies were set up ahead 
of schedule  because  parishioners wanted  them.  Financing a  new 

The  Founding  of  Churches 

•  73  • 

parish  is  costly,  an:d  both  capital  and  operating  expenditures 
must come from the voluntary donations of the parishioners. Had 
the pastor not responded to  their wishes,  their willingness to pro· 
vide  financial  support  might  have  been  reduced. 

Indeed,  the  only  church  to  run  into  serious  organizational 
difficulties  was  the  Methodist,  which  had  been  in  the  township 
for  over  a  hundred  years.  A  new  building was  put  up  to  make 
room  for  the  Levittowners,  but  the  previous  minister  was  re-
tained.  Although  a  young  man,  he  was  more  comfortable  with 
farmers  than with suburbanites and sided continuously with  the 
old  residents  against  the  newcomers.  His  failure  to  allow  the 
Levittowners to assume positions of leadership, his disapproval of 
dancing and movies,  and his overall  conservatism  led to a  defini-
tional  struggle,  but  since  the  congregation  cannot  remove  the 
minister  and  he  proved  resistant  to  change,  the  struggle  soon 
blossomed into an active revolt which lasted  for  over a  year until 
his  superiors  eventually  transferred  him.  No  other  Protestant 
church experienced a real definitional struggle. 

TIIE UNPLANNED CHURCHES:  TIIE JEWS 

Congregation  Beth-Torah,  the  Conservative  synagogue,  and 
Temple  Emanu-El,  the  Reform  synagogue,  were  both  un-
planned.' Although  all  three  branches of Judaism are  organized 
into national agencies, and the Reform branch has  been active in 
starting  new  suburban  temples,  traditional  Jewish  practice  has 
been so  emphatically congregational  that Levittown's Jews never 
thought of calling on, or waiting for,  the External agencies  to set 
up synagogues.  And  if any  resident came  to  Levittown  with  the 
intention of starting a synagogue, he never had an opportunity to 
act,  for community conditions  led  to  the  rapid  and  Unintended 
formation  of both.8 

Barely  three  weeks  after  the  first  purchasers  had  arrived  in 
Levittown,  a  synagogue  Sisterhood  in  nearby  Riverside  invited 
one of its  past members-now a  Levittowner-to a  hat show.  Be-
lieving that this synagogue and another in  Burlington might "go 
after"  the  Levittown  Jews  and  thus  prevent  the  founding  of  a 
local congregation, she concluded that there was no time to spare. 
Besides, it was almost Christmas, and her children wondered why 
they  should celebrate  Chanukah when  everyone  else  was  prepar-
ing for Christmas. Although neither she nor her husband had orig-

•  74  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

inally  wanted  to  start  a  synagogue  in  Levittown,  they  obtained 
the names of the first  twenty-six Jewish families from a  Protestant 
minister and  called a  meeting  early  in  December  1958. 

She  was  evidently  not  alone  in  her  feeling  of  urgency,  for  at 
least one person from  every Jewish  family was  in her living room 
that night. After a  brief discussion, which indicated that all  three 
branches  of  Judaism  were  represented,  it  was  decided  that  ser-
vices  would  be  held  the  week  after  and  that  the  organizational 
discussion  would  continue  at  another  meeting.  At  the  second 
meeting,  people  who  had come  the  first  time  only  to  meet other 
Jews  socially  did  not  reappear,  but  representatives  from  about 
fifteen  families  set  up  the  skeleton  of  a  formal  organization, 
called the Jewish Community Center, and elected  the man whose 
wife  had  called  the  first  meeting as  an  unwilling chairman. 

For  the  next  six  weeks,  services  were  held  every  Friday night, 
and  after  services,  as  well  as  between  times,  there  were  long de-
bates  about  the  formation  of a  congregation.  Although  everyone 
agreed  there  were  enough  people  for  only  one  synagogue,  they 
disagreed  about  which  branch  of  Judaism  it  should  profess.  A 
small  group of  men,  led  by  a  German refugee,  wanted a  Reform 
congregation,  and  another,  yet  smaller,  an  Orthodox  one.  The 
Orthodox faction  was  particularly unhappy over the  prominence 
of  women  in  the  organizational  deliberations  and  advocated,  as 
is  Orthodox custom, a  synagogue  with separate seating for  them. 
The  women  had  no  desire  to  be  either  segregated  or  excluded, 
however.  Most had no intense preference for one branch over an-
other, but were so  eager to get Jewish community life under way 
that they founded  a  Sisterhood even while the men were still  de-
bating about  the  synagogue.  The majority of the  participants in 
the  debate  were  Conservative,  and  eventually,  the  choice  nar-
rowed down to a Conservative or a  Reform congregation. 

The conflict  centered  around  religious  practices  in  the  syna-
gogue,  particularly wearing  hats  at  services,  and  the  obser\tance 
of dietary laws at synagogue socials.  Few people wanted to main-
tain  these  practices  either at home  or in  the  synagogue,  but  the 
Conservatives felt  that the synagogue ought to uphold them even 
if  the  members'  behavior  diverged;  the  Reform  group  argued 
that this was hypocrisy.  I£ Jews did not want to keep the Kashrut 
laws at home or wear hats during prayer, they said,  the synagogue 
should not do so  either.  "Reform  is  the religion  of  the  people," 
one  man  pointed  out.  "Each  congregation  can  choose  its  own 

The  Founding  of  Churches 

•  75  • 

form  of  worship,  with  or  without  hats.  The  Conservatives  are 
boss-run  by  the  rabbis." 4  Much  of  the  argument  concerned  the 
children. The Reform group argued that the rabbi should not be 
allowed  to  persuade children  to  follow  a  tradition  their  parents 
were  unwilling  to  maintain  in  the  home.  The  Conservatives 
agreed  that  they did not want  their children coming home from 
Sunday school  demanding the keeping of the dietary  laws  or ob-
servance  of  the  Sabbath,  but  they  did  want  the  synagogue  to 
continue  teaching  the  tradition.  Since  the  two  groups  agreed 
that  the  synagogue  could  not  compel  observance  in  the  home, 
and  since  they  wanted  to  establish  a  single  congregation,  they 
continued to look for a  formula  that would preserve  their fragile 
unity.  One  man  suggested  that  the  group  form  a  community 
center,  the  eventual  building  to  have  a  Conservative  and  a  Re-
form  wing.  Every meeting verged on a split and, in near despera-
tion,  they invited rabbis from  each  branch  of Judaism  to  discuss 
the  alternatives  before  taking  a  vote  on  their  final  choice.  Al-
though everyone knew  the issues that were causing disagreement, 
it was  hoped  that  the  ral:-bis  would  somehow  find  a  way  to  keep 
the  group  together,  so  the  Levittowners  insisted  that  they  could 
not "sell" their own branch of Judaism. 

At the  time,  the Conservative movement was not interested  in 
setting up new synagogues.  It had grown so  rapidly over the past 
decade  and  was  so  short  of  rabbis  and  building  funds  that  the 
national  office  was  unwilling even  to  send a  rabbi,  and someone 
had to be recruited from a  Philadelphia synagogue.  The Reform 
movement,  however,  was  interested  in  expansion,  and  had  some 
funds  to aid new synagogues.  Consequently,  it  sent an  executive 
from  the national office who made what he called a  "spirited sales 
talk" for  Reform Judaism, in the course of which he attacked the 
Conservative  movement  as  well.  This  was  no  accident,  for  he 
wanted  to see  a  Reform synagogue  in  Levittown.  The Conserva-
tives  were  enraged,  accusing  the  Reform  advocates  of  violating 
the agreement. The latter replied angrily, and about  11  P.M.  that 
night they withdrew-with the rabbi at the head-to set up a  Re-
form  congregation.  Two  days  later,  the  Conservatives  and  the 
handful  of  Orthodox  residents  met  to  organize  a  Conservative 
congregation-then called  the  Jewish  Community  Center-and, 
a  week later,  the  Sisterhood affiliated  with  it. 

After  this  unintended  (though  probably  inevitable)  begin-
ning the  two new congregations asked  External agencies for  help 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

to obtain rabbis and funds to pay their salaries until the member-
ships  were  large  enough  to  pay  them.  The  Reform  movem.ent 
:was  able  and  willing  to  give  both,  but  the  Conservative  move-
ment suggested  that the Levittowners merge with a synagogue in 
Burlington which  needed  an  infusion  of  new  blood.  The Levit· 
towners wanted their own synagogue, however, and turned to the 
Orthodox movement.  Once  the largest  branch of  Judaism  in the 
country,  but now  declining  in  popular  support,  it  had  an  over-
supply  of  rabbis  and  was  willing  to  send  one,  and  even  to con· 
tribute  to  his  salary,  provided  the  Levittowners  would  not 
affiliate  formally with  the  Conservative movement. Although the 
majority  of  the  group  was  not  enthusiastic  about  having  an 
Orthodox  rabbi,  it  finally  accepted  a  young man  who  agreed to 
conduct  services  largely  in  English,  keep  his  personal  religious 
practices to himself, and promise not to demand observance from 
the  children.  Later,  one  of  his  congregants  concluded  that  "his 
orthodoxy gives  us  no  trouble.  He lets us  do what we  want  and 
we  honor his  theory.  If we  had a rabbi who did what we wanted, 
we wouldn't respect him." 

Once  both  congregations  materialized,  enthusiasm  for  reli-
gious activity dimmed; for that matter, attendance at services  had 
never  been  very  high.  Clearly the Jews--Reform and  Conserva-
tive  alike-sought  a  subcommunity  rather  than  a  religious con· 
gregation.  They  wanted  to  be  Jews  (and  to  be  with  Jews),  and 
they  wanted  their  children  to  learn  Jewish  culture  patterns 
which  parents  themselves  were  neither willing nor able  to  teach 
them at home, but they did not want to attend services,  except at 
the  "High Holidays."  Later, when parents with teenagers moved 
into Levittown,  it became apparent that another function  of  the 
Jewish  subcommunity  was  to  prevent  intermarriage.  Several 
Jewish  organizations set  up  teenage  groups to engage youngsters 
in the Jewish community so  that they would not date non-Jewish 
Levittowners.  There was  no  restriction  on  other social  relation-
ships  with  non-Jewish  peers,  however;  only  dating  them  was 
taboo. 

If  the  Jews  wanted  a  subcommunity  only  to  maintain  the 
ethnic tradition and prevent outmarriage, they could presumably 
have created a nonreligious body. This alternative was never con-
sidered,  however,  for  the  tradition  was  conceived  as  a  religious 
one and the synagogue was  expected to maintain ethnic cohesion 
as  well.  Besides,  no  one had  yet  invented  the combination com-

The  Founding  of  Churches 

•  77  • 

munity-and-social  center with  a  marginal religious  program  that 
most  people  seemed  to  prefer.  A  year  or so  later,  after  the  Con-
servatives  had raised  their dues,  some  parents  tried  to organize a 
Hebrew  Academy,  a  school  for  the  children  which  would  also 
conduct  annual  High  Holiday  services  for  the  adults,  but  not 
enough families  turned out for  the organizational  meeting to ac-
tivate  it.  The  failure  of  the  Academy  suggests  that  the  syna-
gogue's  function  was  not  to  represent  what  Jews  did,  but  what 
they  felt  they ought  to do:  to  maintain  the  tradition whether or 
not  the members observed  it.  As  one  Conservative  leader  put it, 
"I work on Saturdays and I  eat ham, but I want my rabbi to walk 
to  the synagogue  and  keep  kosher.  My  children  are  growing  up 
here,  and  I  want  a  traditional  environment  for  them  so  that 
when  they are about seventeen,  they can  choose  for  themselves." 
The  purpose  of  the  synagogue  was  to  keep  the  children  in  the 
fold  to  prevent outmarriage,  but to  leave  the adults  uninvolved. 5 
Nevertheless,  an  adult  Jewish  subcommunity  materialized 
quickly.  Although  the constant nagging of synagogue  leaders  for 
members  did  not  bring  them  into  the  congregations,  it  did 
create,  through  social  pressure,  a  feeling  of  obligation  and  the 
recognition  that  in  the  case  of crisis-such  as  the  emergence  of 
anti-Semitism-the  Jews  would  stand  together.  Moreover,  the 
mere existence  of synagogues  could  be  used  by  parents as  an  ex-
ample  to  persuade  their  children  to  attend  the  Sunday  schools 
(and  among  the  Conservatives,  the  afternoon  Hebrew  school). 
But most  important, Jewish adults were  vitally  interested  in get-
ting  together  with  other  Jews,  and  ultimately,  what  held  the 
Jewish  community  together  was  sociability.  Both  congregations 
soon  had Sisterhoods with more members than the congregations 
of which  they were nominally subsidiaries.  The Sisterhoods were 
run  by  people  from  the  first  two  neighborhoods,  and  Jews  who 
moved into the later neighborhoods sought organizations of their 
own;  the  Reform  women  tended  to  join  B'nai  B'rith;  younger 
Conservative women, O.R.T.;  ani older ones,  Hadassah.  In addi-
tion,  there was  an intricate network of cliques which entertained 
and  partied,  formed  card  clubs,  and  engaged  in  a  never-ending 
round of other social  activities.  Before  long,  the  Jews  had  more 
organizations and organizational memberships per capita than all 
other  Levittowners.6 

The  men  concentrated  on  organizing  the  congregations,  al-
though they also had a men's club with poker groups and Sunday 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

morning  softball  games.  In  the  fall  of  1960,  B'rith  Sholom,  a 
Jewish fraternal  lodge in Philadelphia, called on five  ex-members 
who  had  moved  to  Levittown,  to  consider  the  possibility  of  set-
ting  up  a  branch.  Evidently  there  had  been  considerable  silent 
yearning for such a group, for within three months the lodge had 
almost one hundred members, only a  few  less  than the Conserva-
tive synagogue had been able to enroll in over a year of strenuous 
campaigning. The lodge attracted men who had tired of working 
to secure the survival of the synagogue and wanted a  purely social 
group. As  one of the founders of the Center, who had quit to be-
come a charter member of the lodge,  put it, "I like it because it's 
not a  fund-raising  thing,  it's just social.  We  use  the  money  only 
for  social  affairs.  Each  event  is  run  at cost  and  there  are  lots  of 
them. So we get out to dinners this way,  and this weekend,  there 
is a splash party . . . .  " 

Meanwhile,  the  devel0pment  of  the  congregations  proceeded 
slowly.  The  Reform  congregation  had  an  easier  time  of  it.  Its 
membership numbered  less  than half of that of the Jewish Com-
munity  Center  but  it  had  national  guidance  and  financial  sup-
port, whereas  the Jewish  Community Center had  to raise almost 
all  of its own funds and also had to struggle to keep the peace be-
tween  a  predominantly Conservative membership and an  Ortho-
dox rabbi. 

What attracted adults to the synagogue were  the High Holiday 
services.  Most  Jews  attended  synagogue  only  twice  a  year,  for 
Rosh Hashana and Yom  Kippur services. As a result, membership 
accelerated  just  before  the  High  Holidays.  In  addition,  people 
with children of Sunday school age  became members, for  this was 
the  only  way  in  which  they  could  enroll  the  children  in  the 
school.  One  membership  chairman  said  that  only  perfunctory 
pressure was  put on  Jews  with  younger children,  for  they could 
not be expected to join until  their children were of school age.  In 
June  1959,  the  two congregations had enrolled approximately 30 
per cent of Levittown's Jews;  two years  later,  the  proportion had 
risen  only  1  per  cent-not enough  to  put  the  synagogues  on  a 
solid  financial  footing.  Both  congregations  were  caught  in  a 
vicious circle;  in order to grow, they needed more programs, full-
time rabbis,  and  buildings,  but these cost money and  new  mem-
bers would  have  to  be attracted first.  A  synagogue  building was, 
of  course,  out  of  the  question,  but  the  Reform  movement  had 
bought a  Levitt  house  for  its  congregation  and  thereby  spurred 

The  Founding  of  Churches 

•  79  • 

the  Center to do likewise.  Even  the  upkeep of a  house  required 
more  members,  however,  and  both  groups  were  searching  for 
dynamic  lay  leaders able  to recruit  them.  New men were elected 
to  the  presidency  each  year  in  the  hope  that  they  would  mount 
successful membership campaigns. 

As  early  as  1959,  some  people  in  each  congregation  began  to 
feel  that lay leadership could not break the circle;  the only solu-
tion was  a  charismatic rabbi who could attract members in  large 
numbers, especially among the newer arrivals. The Center began 
to debate the  issue  first,  but,  having  to support itself from  dues, 
was  also  most sharply divided.  One group wanted  to  hire a  full-
time "go-getter" rabbi, even if it meant deficit financing;  another 
argued  for  slow  growth  and  a  part-time  rabbi  until  more  Jews 
moved to Levittown. The advocates of the full-time rabbi won by 
a  vote  in  1g6o, but at the last minute the only person  they could 
hire was a  "scholar" who could not deliver new members. 

In  1961,  the  same  factions  battled  again,  but  a  newcomer  to 
the Center returned  to  the  theme  of a  lay-centered congregation 
and  ran  for  the  presidency  on  the  platform  that  the  members 
could  support  a  rapidly  growing  congregation-provided,  how-
ever,  that they prepared to build, for only "a building" would at-
tract enough recalcitrant Jews to put the congregation on  its feet 
financially.  His victory drove out some of the proponents of slow 
growth,  but  he  brought  in  a  professional  fund  raiser  who  col-
lected  enough  in  pledges  to  initiate  a  building  program.  The 
new president also  helped  to select a  new rabbi who was  the "go-
getter"  the  congregation  had  long  been  looking  for.  This rabbi 
was  Orthodox,  for  Levittown  still  could  not afford  a  Conserva-
tive,  but he was an older man with enough experience in Conser-
vative  congregations  to know  that  he could not  convert  them  to 
Orthodoxy.  He was  not upset by the screening committee's insis-
tence  on  non-kosher  food  at  synagogue  socials--that  being 
cheaper-nor dismayed  by  poor  attendance  at  Friday  night ser-
vices.  He  built  up attendance somewhat by having children  par-
ticipate in the services,  which attracted their parents and friends, 
and he satisfied  his  own religious needs by meeting for daily ser-
vices  with  a  few  Orthodox Jews.  The rabbi's real  interest,  how-
ever,  was  in  enrolling  new  members  and  getting  a  synagogue 
erected.  With  his  coming,  the  Conservative  synagogue  began  to 
resemble  the minister-centered church of the Protestants, and al-
though  the  laymen  still  competed  for  officer  posts,  they  left  the 

•  Bo  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

running  of  the  synagogue  to  the  rabbi  and  devoted  themselves 
more  fully  to  social  and  other activities.  The  Reform  congrega-
tion  went  through  roughly  the  same  metamorphosis. 

The fund  raiser  for  the  Conservative  synagogue  was  an  effec-
tive  practitioner  of  his  craft,  who  knew  how  to  appeal  to  what 
was  evidently a  widespread desire  for  a  building.  A  Levittowner 
and  a  Catholic,  he  had  previously conducted  the  fund  drive  for 
his own church and had collected an amount that exceeded even 
his  expectations.  The  synagogue  fund  drive  was  aided  consider-
ably  by  $soo  pledges  from  a  small  group of  members,  and  by a 
Sisterhood  promise  to  collect  $w,ooo.  It was  probably  aided  by 
the maturing of the Jewish  population as  well,  for  as  more fami-
lies  had  children  of  Sunday  school  age,  congregational  member-
ship increased, reaching 45  per cent of the  town's Jewish  popula-
tion  by  1962.7  In  1963,  both  congregations  had  begun  to  erect 
synagogues, completing them in the sixth of the community's ex-
istence.  Their  co-religionists  in  Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  had 
taken only four years,  but then this community had grown  much 
more quickly  and  the Jewish  population  was  larger. 

PLANNED AND UNPLANNED RELIGIOUS  GROWTH 

The  formation  of  the  Jewish  subcommunity  points  up  the 
dilemmas of  planned and unplanned formation,  and of External 
and  Internal  initiative.  The  Externally  planned  churches  orga-
n:zed quickly and grew systematically about as scheduled, but the 
development of the Unintended synagogues was  slow  and  turbu-
lent,  depending as  it did on  the  varying needs  and moods of  the 
membership. Although the synagogues wanted to grow as  rapidly 
and  peacefully  as  the  churches,  they  could  not  easily  agree  on 
growth strategies.  For one thing,  they lacked studies--and the in-
clination  to  conduct  them-to determine  whether an  aggressive 
rabbi  or  a  building  would  actually  bring  in  more  members,  or 
whether only a  larger base  population could achieve  this aim.  In 
the  absence  of  knowledge,  each  faction  defended  what  to  it was 
the  most  comfortable  strategy.  The  merchants  and  other  sales 
people  were  inclined  toward  a  rabbinical  salesman,  the  profes-
sionals  wanted  a  scholar  with  whom  they  could  communicate, 
and  the  less  affluent  Jews  preferred  the cheapest  solution.  Even-
tually,  the  aggressive  rabbi  and  the  building did  swell  member-
ship,  but  the  debates  over  growth  strategy  had  also  postponed 

The  Founding  of  Churches 

•  81  • 

their  arrival  until  the  total  Jewish  population  had  increased. 
The definitional struggles had costs other than indecision. The 
debates  that  produced  the  split  were  carried  on  by  leaders  who 
were  extreme  partisans  of  their  positions.  Each  cared  deeply 
about  his  own  view  of  Judaism-which  is  what  made  them 
leaders-but  this  partisanship  also  intensified  religious  quarrels 
about which  the large majority cared less  and  prevented  the rise 
of  more  moderate  leaders  who  could  perhaps  have  achieved  a 
compromise.  More  important,  before  the  split  and  after,  differ-
ences  of  opinion  were  frequently  taken  personally,  resulting  in 
personal  animosities  that were  hard  to  bury.  After  evety debate 
or election some members  left or shifted to  the  other synagogue, 
while  others  refused  to  work  with  the  people  with  whom  they 
had argued.  Had new  leaders  who  were  uninvolved  in  past  ani-
mosities  not  been  available  from  among  later  arrivals  to  Levit-
town,  the synagogues would probably have  been  built still  later. 
Even  so,  the  intensity  of  the  quarreling  stemmed  from  eco-
nomic rather  than  personality factors.  The decisions of the Con-
servatives  directly  affected  their  pocketbooks  and  limited  their 
choices,  and  the  Reform group  benefitted  more  than  financially 
from  its  subsidy.  Not  only  was  it  able  to  hire  a  full-time  rabbi 
and build as  quickly as  the Conservatives,  even  though  its  mem-
bership was much smaller,  but its greater freedom  from  financial 
worries shortened and tempered the definitional struggles. 

If speed  and  effectiveness  of organization  are  maximal values, 
then  External  and  planned  formation  is  obviously  most  desir-
able;  if democracy and lay control are most  important,  then it is 
inappropriate.  Of course,  it is  perhaps  improper to  compare  the 
Protestant  and  Jewish  formation  processes,  because  the  Protes-
tant church plays a  lesser  role  than  the synagogue  in  the  lives of 
its  members.  The church  is  only a  provider of religious  services 
and one of many sources  of friends,  whereas  the synagogue  must 
meet many of the ethnic, emotional, and social needs of an entir~ 
subcommunity.  Furthermore,  only 
religious 
branches  (and  two  in  Levittown)  are  available  to  accommodate 
and sort  people differentiated  by age,  class,  and degree  of accul-
turation,  and  are  likely  to  produce  quite  heterogeneous  congre-
gations.  The  Protestants,  with  their  many  denominations,  can 
sort people into much more homogeneous groups,  making it rel-
atively easy for  the External  planners to anticipate their needs-
and  therefore,  to systematize  the  church  formation.  The  history 

three  Jewish 

•  82  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

of the  Methodist church  indicates that External  planning had to 
be responsive to membership wishes  if definitional struggles were 
to be minimized-but then, Protestant wishes were much simpler 
and more obvious than Jewish ones. 

Needless to say,  lay  Levittowners involved in  the organizing of 
their  religious  bodies did not  have  a  real  choice  between  Exter-
nal  and  Internal  formation.  Protestants  could,  of  course,  have 
opposed  the  prescriptions  of  the  External  agencies  and  their 
starter ministers,  but ministers are viewed  both as  moral  leaders 
and  as  experts  whose  proposals  are  not  easily  questioned.  Also, 
most  Protestants  were  not  inclined  to  be  critical;  neither  the 
structure nor the functions of the church were that vital  to them. 
The Jews had no choice at all, for when they came together, they 
immediately had to debate  far  more  basic  questions,  such as  the 
desirability  of  tradition  versus  acculturation,  and  ethnic  versus 
religious  identity-questions  which  few  Jews  had  even  thought 
about  before  they  moved  to  Levittown.  Although  some  of  the 
people involved in the six-weel( debate indicated that it had been 
a significant learning experience, most had considerable difficulty 
in coping with  the conflict and were happy when the split ended 
the arguments.8  Had they been able to choose,  they would  prob-
ably have opted for the responsive  External planning that created 
the  Protestant  and  Catholic  churches. 

CHURCH  AND COMMUNITY 

By  1961,  embryo  churches  were  functioning  in  Levittown,  and 
some  had  even  achieved  that  stability  one  finds  among  long-
established  congregations.  Most  Protestant  denominations  had 
either moved into their church or had a  building under construc-
tion, and Catholics, now running a parochial school, were already 
envisaging  a  second  parish.  Judging  from  church  membership 
rolls in  1g6o, about 35  per cent of  the nonfundamentalist Protes-
tant  families  had joined a  church,  and 40  per cent of this group 
attended  regularly  (at  least  three  times  a  month).  Undoubtedly, 
proportions  were  higher  among  Catholics,  whereas  among  the 
Jews, about 30 per cent had joined a synagogue by  1g6o,  but only 
about 8 per cent of these attended regularly. All the churches had 
established Sunday schools,  and  it seemed  that even among Prot-
estants many parents had joined in order to encourage their chil-
dren  to  learn  the  religious  and  ethical  tradition.  "I  don't  quite 

The  Founding  of  Churches 

•  83  • 

believe  the  teachings,"  said one  Levittowner who became  active 
in a church for the first  time in his life, "but it's good for the kids 
to nave the background. Also,  it's  because  I  bought a  house,  and 
for becoming a  part of the community." The t=atio  of attendance 
to  enrollment  in  the  Protestant  Sunday  schools  was  50  per  cent 
higher than  in the church itself,  but among the Jews,  it was  830 
per cent  higher,  for  three  fourths  of  the  enrolled  children  were 
attending Sunday school regularly. 

Among  Catholics,  the  church  and  school  had  a  somewhat 
different  function-to  teach  children  discipline  and  restraint 
Working class  Catholics, as  well  as  a  number of the Irish middle 
class,  see  this  as  a  major  purpose  of  the  church,  which  perhaps 
helps  to explain why  Catholic families  oversubscribed  the school 
building fund.  A few  middle class families were restive about the 
narrowness of the parochial school curriculum, wanting more in-
dividual  attention,  less  rote learning, and  more  emphasis on  the 
arts, but the nuns decided what was to be taught and how.  Conse-
quently,  these  parents sent  their children  to  public schools. 

The churches  also  played  a  role  in  the  development  of  social 
life and in the sorting of residents; about 13  per cent of the inter-
view  respondents  reported  having  met  their  closest  friends  at 
church  or at  the  men's,  women's,  and couples'  clubs attached  to 
the  church,  but  the  churches  did  not  stress  social  programs  to 
attract  members.  The  sorting  function  was  further  encouraged 
by  providing  services  in  a  range  of  orthodoxy  so  that  people  of 
similarly intensive religious concern would be at church together 
and no one would  feel  excluded.  Episcopalians  held a  High ser-
vice  early  on  Sunday  morning and a  Low  one  later,  avoiding  a 
decision  whether  the  church  should  be  High  or  Low;  the  Con-
servative synagogue conducted Friday night services with a  mini-
mum of Hebrew, added more on Saturday mornings, and offered 
daily worship for  Orthodox Jews;  and fundamentalist  Protestant 
churches  held  Sunday  and  Wednesday  night  prayer  meetings 
open only to full members. 

Despite  normal  class  differences  among  denominations,  there 
was no class hierarchy of churches, at least not by  1961. The Pres-
byterian  and  Episcopalian  churches,  which  are  often  high-status 
denominations in America, did not have this reputation in Levit-
town.  At  this  stage  in  the  town's  history,  there was  little  oppor-
tunity to make status judgments about the churches, for they had 
not yet  played a  significant role in community life and none had 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

a  monopoly,  or  even  a  plurality,  of  community  leaders  among 
their  members.  Indeed,  if  a  church  had  special  prestige,  it was 
based  on  a  large  congregation,  an  attractive  building,  and  the 
pastor's  role  in  Levittown.  By  these  criteria,  the  Episcopalian 
church ranked lower than  some  others,  if  only  because its minis-
ter  was  older  and  less  active  in  Levittown  affairs  than  his  col-
leagues. The Methodist church was  probably at the bottom of the 
status hierarchy,  for  its  building was considered  ugly,  it had  per-
mitted Levitt to build a gas  station next door,  it was known  to be 
undergoing considerable  turmoil  within  the  congregation,  and 
its first  minister was  openly anti-Catholic.' 

Churches were  formally  distinct from  other community activ-
ities,  although ministers  blessed  (and spoke  at)  community func-
tions.10  People  active  in  church  organizations  were  frequently 
busy in secular groups, and vice versa,  for someone with a reputa-
tion  for  community activity  could  hardly  escape  being asked  by 
his  or her minister to  take  a  leading role  in church affairs.  As  a 
result,  there  was  some  relation  between  the  church  and  the 
secular  community;  and,  of  course,  some  involvement  in  town 
politics--on  issues  such  as  opening  the  township  to  liquor sales 
and  bingo games  and,  for  the  Catholics,  on  the  budget  for  the 
public schools. 

Relations among individual  churches were limited but largely 
cordial.  After  the  initial  competition for  recruits,  the  Protestant 
ministers  formed  a  Ministerium,  held  a  few  joint  affairs,  ex-
changed ministers, and celebrated Reformation Sunday together. 
The Ministerium  also  played  a  significant  role  in  the  racial  in-
tegration of the community.  Fundamentalist churches stayed out 
of  the  Ministerium,  however,  and  relations  between  major  and 
minor Protestant ministers continued to be somewhat distant be· 
cause  of  the  early  struggle  for  members.  Competition  remained 
rife  only  among  the  Jews,  where  an  innovation  in  one  congre-
gation  was  usually  copied  by  the  other  shortly  afterwards.  The 
ministers  and  rabbis  tried  to  minimize differences  between  reli-
gions  and  worked  actively  to  squelch  community  religious  con-
flict  the moment it appeared, fighting charges of anti-Catholicism 
and anti-Semitism that arose once or twice in political campaigns. 
They did not have to dwell on religious harmony, however, for it 
was considered desirable by most residents. Many agreed with one 
Levittowner who said,  "Religious differences aren't important, as 
long  as  everyone  practices  what  he  preaches."  The  institutions 
acted  similarly,  and  the  public  schools  had  planned  Chanukah 

The  Founding  of  Churches 

•  Bs  • 

celebrations  even  before  the  leaders  of  the  Jewish  community 
had asked for them. 

NOTES 

1.  ''Unchurched" is religious jargon to describe people who said they 

had not belonged  to  a  church  in  their  previous  residence. 

2.  The third unplanned and Unintended church was  the  Unitarian, 
organized  because  the  nearest  congregation  was  in  Philadelphia. 
The Levittown Unitarian church eventually served all of Burling-
ton County. 

3·  My  study of the origin of the synagogues  was  more detailed  than 
that  of  the  organization  of  other  churches,  because  I  had  previ-
ously studied the beginnings of a Jewish subcommunity in another 
suburban  new  town  and  was  curious  to  compare  the  two.  The 
earlier study  is  reported in  Gans  (1951,  1957),  and more  fully  in 
Gans (1958). 

4·  A  decade earlier the rise  of Conservatism was  described  by Sklare 
as a congregationally led revolt against the  rabbinical domination 
of Orthodoxy. 

5·  This followed  exactly  the  pattern I  had observed  in  Park  Forest, 
where  I  described  in  detail  the change  from  an  adult-oriented  to 
a  child-oriented Jewish  religion.  See  Gans  (1958),  pp.  214-221. 
6.  Above-average  Jewish  organizational  activity  and  minimal  syna-
gogue  attendance  were  also  reported  in  a  study  of  Levittown, 
Pennsylvania, in its early years.  See Jahoda et al.,  pp.  95-96. 

7·  This is  close  to  the  national  estimate  that half of America's Jews 

belong  to  synagogues. 

8.  The  researcher  has  different  preferences.  I  sat  in  on  all  of  the 
meetings  during  the  historic  six  weeks  and  found  them  very  ex-
citing  to  study.  Indeed,  observing  the  Jewish  community  was 
never  boring,  for  meetings  of  both  synagogues  and  Jewish  or-
ganizations  always  produced  more  participation  and  argument 
from  the  floor  than  those  of  Christian  and  secular  nonpolitical 
groups-where  the  decisions  of  leaders  were  usually  accepted 
without  protest  and  the  routine  was  cut  and  dried. 

9·  Although  no  one  paid  much  attention  to  them,  some  of  the  tra-
ditional  ethnic differences  remained;  German  names  were  prom-
inent in  the  Lutheran church  and  only  slightly  Jess  so  than  Irish 
ones in  the  Catholic parish.  Italians maintained  their  traditional 
lack  of  interest  in  church  activities  except  for  Mass,  although 
some  with  non-Italian  spouses  were  involved  in  church  affairs. 
10.  Levittown  unconsciously  adopted  the  tripartite division  of Amer-
ican religion,  and  pains were  taken  at  all  community  ceremonies 
to include  benedictions by  a  minister,  a  priest,  and a  rabbi.  Only 
at Township Committee meeting benedictions was any effort made 
to use ministers  from  all  Protestant denominations as  well. 

Chapter Five 

THE  NEW  SCHOOL  SYSTEM 

D 

D 

D 

D 

WHEN  THE  FIRST  LEVITTOWNERS  MOVED  IN  THEY  KNEW  THAT  THE 
school  was ready,  but they knew nothing about what their child-
ren  would  be  taught  or  by whom.  Questionnaire  data  collected 
before  they  came  indicated  that  they  were  not  concerned;  they 
were  sure  that  the  new  schools  would  be as  satisfactory  as  their 
new neighbors. As  I noted in Chapter One, the builder had hired 
a  national  consulting  firm  to  develop  the  physical  plan  for  the 
new  school  system.  This firm,  having  no  parent or student  con-
stituency  for  whom  to  plan,  developed  a  standard  architectural 
program  adaptable  to whatever  curriculum would  eventually be 
created and left  the determination  of  that curriculum  up  to  the 
local  Board of Education. The board, a  group  of elected,  unpaid 
residents  then  running  Willingboro's  lone  school,  was  also  re-
strained by the absence of a  constituency, and one of its members 
later reported  that  "since  we  had  no  Levittowners  yet,  we  tried 
to give  them a  plan  for  the  finest  school  system  in  the  county." 
They decided  that  this system would  be  best achieved  by giving 
the responsibility for course  content,  teaching methods, and staff 
recruitment  to  the county superintendent of  schools. 

Since  that  official  was  by  state  law  also  head  of  the  township 
school,  the  board  was  familiar  with  his  ideas  and  methods  and 
trusted  him  to  design  a  school  system  it  would  find  acceptable. 
Indeed, its members were pleased that after the Ford Foundation 
plan could not be funded,  the builder expressed no further desire 
to  bring  in  an  outsider;  they  were  even  more  pleased  that  the 
county superintendent was  very  much  interested  in  establishing 

•  86  • 

The  New  School  System 

the  new  system.  Shortly  before  Levittown  was  opened  for  oc-
cupancy, he became its first  Superintendent of Schools.  Although 
much  of  the  plan  was  fixed  by  state  and  county  legislation  and 
administrative  regulations,  the  superintendent  had  some  leeway 
on course content and was free  to hire his own staff;  most impor-
tant,  he  could  determine· the  priorities  to  be  given  to  bright, 
average,  and slow students. As  a  result,  the school  system  was ini-
tially shaped by the superintendent's own goals. 

The  county  superintendent  had  been  in  office  for  about  ten 
years;  before that  he  had headed the schools  in  one of the larger 
towns  in  the  county.  The  system  he  developed  in  Levittown, 
however,  reflected  less  his adult experience  than  his  background 
and  student  years.  An  Irish  Catholic  of  lower  middle  class  ori-
gins,  he  was  personally  tom  between  enforcing  discipline  to 
maintain  traditional  restrictiveness  and  permitting  more  free-
dom to encourage expansiveness and individual development. He 
had been taught by rote, and had evidently suffered considerably 
at the hands of incompetent and petty teachers who punished for 
the slightest infractions of rules.  Nothing was  more  important to 
him than to liberate  the new generation  from  these  bonds.  Like 
many  Levittowners  he  wanted  the  children  to  grow  up  under 
better conditions  than  he  had  experienced.  He was  not  in  favor 
of progressive  education,  which struck  him as  totally  permissive, 
but  sought  to  combine  what  he  called  "the  teaching  of  tradi-
tional  skills  with  individual  treatment  of  the  children."  Hard-
and-fast course outlines would  be replaced  by  projects,  and  high 
school  students  would  be  free  to  choose  their  own  courses,  al-
though they would be closely advised by guidance counselors and 
held  responsible  for  their choices  by  a  strict grading  policy. 

Reading  was  to  him  the  most  important  of  the  traditional 
skills,  and  he  planned a  comprehensive  elementary  school  read-
ing program complementary to other coursework.  Its aim  was  to 
teach children to read well, but-equally important-at their own 
grade level.  When he interviewed a  prospective teacher,  he asked 
what  the  teacher  would  do  if  a  child  in  the  second  grade  had 
finished  the  second-grade  reader.  Candidates  who  suggested  a 
supplementary  second-grade  reader  were  considered  for  a  job; 
those who suggested  a  third-grade  reader  were  not.  As  the  read-
ing  expert  whom  he  later  hired  to  run  the  program  pointed 
out,  "A sixth-grade  child  should  not  get  seventh-grade  reading; 
that would  get  him  into adolescent  reading  . . .  a  child  should 

•  88  • 

not start reading too quickly  • 
away from him." 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

that would take his childhood 

Because  the  superintendent had  spent his  life  in  rural  educa-
tion,  he was  intensely concerned with average  students, retarded 
children, and slow learners. Although he realized that many of to-
day's  high  school  graduates would  go  to college,  the  colleges  he 
had  in  mind  were  not  Ivy  League  types,  but  state  schools  and 
small private colleges in New Jersey and adjoining states-schools 
like  the one he had attended.  He determined that,  in Levittown, 
the  public  school  system  would  devote  extra  energies  and  its 
additional  resources  to  the  retarded,  with  lowest  priority  given 
bright students.  Not only did he feel  that  the latter needed little 
help-much  less  than  retarded  students-but  he  found  their 
motives  and  their  behavior  undesirable.  In  his  view  they  were 
pushed  too  hard  by  their  parents,  who  wanted  them  to advance 
beyond  grade  level,  and  they  were  often  a  burden  to  teachers, 
especially if parents demanded too much individual attention "to 
make  sure  that  they  all  get  college  scholarships."  An  overem-
phasis on college preparation in the curriculum would ignore, he 
said,  "the great unwashed  who can't go  to college;  the girls  who 
become typists."  In line with his own lower middle class outlook, 
he  insisted  that  Levittown  would not copy  Brookline and Scars-
dale, and rejected such "Brookline ideas" as  teaching foreign lan-
guages  in  elementary  schools  and  allowing  liberal  skipping  of 
grades.  He liked to poke fun at a  neighboring upper middle class 
community whose  school  system  prided  itself on a  high  percent-
age  of college  scholarships,  arguing that it ought to  pay more at-
tention  to athletics so  that average students could obtain scholar-
ships.  This  justified  his  advocacy  of  varsity  sports,  although  he 
also wanted to bring county athletic leadership to Levittown and 
end the virtual monopoly of county championships that had been 
held  by  a  predominantly  working  class  community  for  many 
years. 

Rather  naturally,  the  superintendent  selected  assistants  who 
agreed  with  his  basic  philosophy.  The  elementary  schools  were 
assigned  to  a  veteran  county  educator  who  shared  the  superin-
tendent's preoccupation with discipline.  Known as  a "starter," he 
was  an energetic man  who thrived on  the round-the-clock  job of 
opening new  schools.  He  too  said  publicly and more  than  once, 
"I  won't  stand  for  a  Brookline  education,"  and  reinforced  the 
emphasis  on  the  average  student  by  rejecting  IQ  tests  and  aca-

The  New  School  System 

•  Bg  • 

demic competition of any kind,  whether among parents or chil-
dren. He also believed that if the school staff took the initiative in 
shaping the school system,  it could set standards which would be 
observed by students and parents alike. On the first day of school, 
he  welcomed  his  charges  at  the  front  door  and  laid  down  his 
rules.  Likewise,  he  personally  initiated  the  organization  of  a 
PTA, choosing it because  its  bylaws demanded support of school 
policy  and  moving  quickly  to  prevent  parents  from  organizing 
home-and-school  groups  which  could  question  it.  Moreover,  he 
personally recruited the actual  PTA founders  from  people he al-
ready  knew  and  trusted,  taking strangers only  if he  could check 
with  their  previous  communities  on  their  loyalty  to  the  school 
system.  He  also  demanded  that  his  teachers  "belong  to  the  sys-
tem." Teachers were  instructed to pay close attention to parents, 
for  dissatisfied  parents  would  create  pressure  groups,  and  these 
the  elementary  school  official  described  as  "cancers."  His  self-
righteous  authoritarianism  was  overlaid  by  an  expansive  ideal-
ism,  that he or anyone else could do what he wanted provided he 
wanted it badly enough.  This viewpoint not only served as  a ra-
tionalization for his methods, but also blinded him to the difficul-
ties  of his  task,  making  him  an  efficient  starter and  encouraging 
the  beginnings  of a  common  "school  culture"  in  all  the  schools 
he set up. 

For  the  first  year,  Levittown's  high  school  students  were 
farmed  out  to  other  communities,  but  in  1959,  when  it  came 
time  to  plan  a  local  high  school,  the  superintendent  selected  a 
principal  who  was  similarly  seeking  to  balance  discipline  and 
freedom.  Although  he came  from  a  school  where  So  per cent of 
the graduates  went on  to college,  he looked forward  to  being in 
Levittown,  where  preliminary  estimates  showed  that  no  more 
than  half  would  continue  their  education.  He  too  argued  that 
average  students were  being "robbed"  by  too  much  curriculum 
emphasis  on  college  preparation,  and  he  also  resented  the  de-
mands  of  "college  prep  students,  who  give  you  a  harder  time." 
He wanted to reduce the status hierarchy built into the academic, 
commercial,  and general  (a  euphemism  for  vocational)  divisions 
in the country high schools; he hoped that by permitting students 
do  choose  courses  in  all  of  them,  college  prep  students  would 
come  into  more  contact with  the  business  trainees  and  the  gen-
eral division students. He had a  genuine interest in the last,  who 
he  felt  were  being  neglected  because  of  inferior  or nonexistent 

•  go  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

vocational  courses  and  were  ostracized  by  their  fellow  students. 
As  it  turned out,  however,  not all  Levittowners shared the prin-
cipal's  and  superintendent's  priorities  and  their  belief  in  com-
pensatory support for  the intellectually disadvantaged. 

THE DEFINITIONAL STRUGGLES 

Voluntary associations and churches, being private agencies with 
sorting  functions,  could  end definitional  struggles  by  extruding 
people with divergent views.  The school  system,  however, like all 
public agencies served  the entire community and had  to  provide 
for  its diverse  demands within a  single institution. As  a  result,  it 
was soon embroiled in definitional struggles aimed at revising the 
superintendent's original goals. 

When  the  Levittowners  arrived,  they  were  delighted  that  the 
first  elementary  school  was  open  on  schedule,  and  were  pleased 
with  the  new,  modern  facilities  and  the  young,  energetic  teach-
ers.  They  seemed  satisfied  with  their  children's  performance, 
joined  the  PTA and  crowded  its  meetings,  and  even  helped  the 
schools  by  working  in  a  variety  of  PTA  fund  raising and  other 
projects.  Some  Catholics felt  that  the public school  was  lax-too 
much  "play" and not enough discipline-and these  parents (like 
most  other  Catholics)  enrolled  their  children  in  the  parochial 
school as soon  as  it opened.  Other parents may have been uneasy 
about one or another aspect of the  program,  but they decided to 
be patient with  the new system, arguing that "it was  too early  to 
heckle." As  a result, the administrators and teachers received very 
little criticism during the first  two years--or for that matter, little 
feedback  of  any  kind.  Although  the  principals  maintained  an 
open-door policy so  that parents could air complaints at any time, 
relatively few  did so.  One man, who had run  two  Levittown  ele-
mentary schools,  reported that the only curriculum complaint he 
ever  received  came  from  a  well-educated  mother  who  wanted 
more  work  for  her  talented  daughter.  What  complaints  there 
were  concerned  the  lunch  schedule  and  overly severe  discipline. 
On  one occasion,  when  a  teacher  had  a  near-breakdown  in  class 
and upset many children to tears, almost every  parent turned out 
that  night  at  the  school  board  meeting  to  protest.  Beyond  that, 
most  parents  seemed  content  to  leave  education  to  the  school, 
assuming that the  teachers knew best what was good for  the chil-
dren. 

The  New  School  System 

•  91  • 

Some  of the  plans  made  by  the  superintendent and  his  associ-
ates had to be changed to respond  to unexpected conditions. The 
elementary  schools  functioned  pretty  much  as  their  starter  in-
tended-but  then  their  students  were  a  captive  audience,  too 
young to make choices or to object to adult demands. At first  the 
parents,  too,  were  pleased  with  him,  particularly since  he  spoke 
to  them  idealistically,  well,  and  often,  never forgetting  to  praise 
their  children.  Once  all  the  schools  had  been  started,  however, 
and a routine had been established,  his flowery  speeches  began  to 
grate, especiall')t on  parents and teachers who disliked his oppres-
sive  methods and  his  way  of using rhetoric  to  avoid  confronting 
disagreement.  He resigned  before opposition  had a  chance to  be-
come visible and widespread. 

When it came to  the organization of the high school,  the initial 
plans  had  to  be adapted  to  the diversity  and  choice-making abil-
ity  of  the  students.  Reducing  the  barriers  between  the  three  di-
visions assumed a  fairly  equal  proportion of choices  in  each,  but 
so per cent of the students opted for  the academic track, and gen-
eral  students  were  a  small  minority.  Consequently,  the  school 
had  to  emphasize  "college  prep"  after  all,  and even  initiated an 
honors  program, but could not mount a  vocational  program. To 
prevent  the  possibility  that  the  general  students  might  become 
resentful and cause trouble, the principal tried to make them feel 
part of  the  school  through  extracurricular activities  and  sought, 
unsuccessfully,  to  have  one  elected  as  a  student  council  officer. 
Even  so,  he  could  not  counteract  their  hostility,  and  later  they 
ranked high among the dropouts and serious delinquents. 

Plans  to  give  all  students  more  freedom  of course  choice  and 
class  attendance  were  frustrated  by  the  poor  marks  some  had 
earned  while  attending  neighboring  schools  the  year  before. 
Evidently treated as  unwelcome outsiders, one third had to make 
up work  that summer,  and their poor records,  as  well  as  the  ini-
tial  stirrings  of juvenile delinquency just before  the high school 
opened,  frightened  the  school  board  members.  Teenage  vandal-
ism  and delinquency had  been  unknown  in  the  township  previ-
ously, largely because its few adolescents had had to go elsewhere 
for  recreation.  Not knowing what  to expect  from  the  Levittown 
youngsters,  the  board  and  the  administration  were  reluctant  to 
trust their new charges, and because they were then engaged in a 
struggle  with  upper  middle  class  parents  on  another  issue,  they 
were  not  eager  to  initiate  freedoms  that  might  well  engender 

•  92  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

protests  from  restrictive  parents.  Instead,  the  high  school  prin-
cipal  sought  to  instill  more  "school  spirit,"  particularly  by  en-
couraging  the  immediate  formation  of  a  varsity  football  team. 
Even  though  he  believed  it  to  be  premature,  he  gave  in  to  the 
demands of some residents and the wishes  of the superintendent, 
hopeful  that  it would make  for  a  peaceful  and cooperative rela-
tionship  with  the  student  body.  Needless  to  say,  this  was  too 
much  to  expect of a  football  team,  and although students main-
tained  order-except for  a  rash  of  bomb  scares  one spring-the 
desired  feeling  of cooperation  and  trust was  not achieved in the 
early years. 

The  Revolt of the  Upper  Middle  Class 

Highly  educated  Levittowners  with  bright  children  did  not 
take long to realize that the new school  was not giving their chil-
dren  high  priority.  There were  relatively few  such  parents,  and 
those  who  could  afford  it  transferred  their  children  to  nearby 
private  schools,  but these  did  not  provide  kindergartens. Just as 
the  superintendent  had  augured,  the  parents  began  to  "cause 
trouble" soon after they arrived in Levittown. 

In  the  spring  of  1959.  the  township  Board  of  Education  an-
nounced  that  in  congruence  with  state  Board  of  Education 
policy,  it  would  only  admit  children  into  kindergarten  if  they 
had reached the age  of five  by October  1.  This policy was at once 
questioned  by  a  couple  of  lower  middle  class  parents  with  chil-
dren  born  a  few  days  after  the  cut-off  date,  but  school  officials 
persuaded  them of  the wisdom  of the policy.  At the next school 
board  meeting,  however,  the  issue  was  reopened  by  two  upper 
middle  class  professionals,  and  before  long,  they  presented  the 
board with a  petition signed  by  170  parents  asking for  a  change 
in  the  cut-off  date  to  December  31.  When  that  petition  was  re-
jected,  they  collected  200  more  names,  and  with  it a  small  but 
vocal group who kept the issue alive for several months. 

The board members had never before been confronted with a 
petition and reacted with resentment and fear.  "If we  listened to 
all  the  wishes,"  one  said,  "there  would  be government  by  peti-
tion and  that is  not desirable."  Protests would cast aspersions on 
them and mean longer working hours to deal  with the protests as 
well.  They  wanted  neither,  particularly  since  they  knew  that 
they would lose  their positions to  Levittowners as  soon as  the lat-
ter had fulfilled  the two-year residence requirement. A change in 

The  New  School  System 

•  93  • 

the cut-off date would bring more children into schools that were 
already full,  violate state policy as  well as  the wishes  of the super-
intendent, and force  the board members to support a  policy they 
themselves considered undesirable. The questions now at issue-
responsiveness  to  the constituents,  the justification of local  inno-
vation  in  county  tradition,  and  the  role  of  the  school  in  the 
community-would  come  up  again  and  again  in  the  years  to 
come. 

The proponents of the date change were almost all  upper mid-
dle  class  people,  eager  to  get  their  children  into  school,  the 
sooner  to  qualify  for  college  competition.  The  board  members 
and  the  school  staff  believed,  however,  that children  should  not 
be asked  to sacrifice  their childhood or jeopardize their "natural" 
social  adjustment.  Indeed,  some  of  them felt  that a child  should 
not enter  the first  grade until  he was  seven.  The older he  was  at 
the  time  of graduation,  the  more  mature  he  would  be,  and  the 
more  likely  to  obtain  a  good  job.  These  were  overwhelmingly 
lower  middle  class  people,  concerned  only  that  the  children 
would get good white collar jobs once  they finished  their school-
ing.  To  them,  family  came  before  school;  in  fact,  they  accused 
the  proponents of  the date change of wanting their children out 
of the  house and of using the school  as  a  baby-sitter.  They could 
not understand that the proponents were already preparing their 
youngsters for professional careers. 

The proponents of change were cosmopolitans and were  think-
ing  in  terms  of  the  nationwide  competition  for  admission  to 
"name" universities. The board members and the school  staff,  on 
the other hand, had spent all  their Jives  in New Jersey,  and  their 
allegiance was  to the township, the county, and the local colleges. 
Finally,  the  proponents  fervently  advocated  innovation  and  ar-
gued that in a new community a fresh start should be made while 
conditions were  still  propitious--at the beginning, with consum-
mate speed,  and  on  the  basis  of expert advice.  The board  mem-
bers  retorted  that  they  had  no  time  for  innovation,  having 
enough  to do  just  to  get  the routine  established,  and  besides,  as 
one pointed out, "The community is  not like a Cadillac in which 
everything is  finished  before it comes out of the factory;  it has  to 
develop and  the  people  have  to  put  the  finishing  touches  on  it 
themselves." 

In response  to  the  board's call  for  more  facts,  the  proponents 
consulted  educational  psychologists  all  over  the  East  Coast  and 

•  94  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

superintendents of  school  systems  with  late cut-off  dates.  Agree-
ing  that  age  was  an  arbitrary  criterion  for  cut-off,  they  recom-
mended  a  testing  program  by which  children  under  five  before 
December  31  would  be  admitted  to  the  kindergarten  upon  a 
good showing on  tests.  To their amazement,  however,  the board 
rejected  the  proposal.  It  referred  to  other  expert  opinion  on 
which  state  policy  had  been  based,  found studies which claimed 
that  children's  eyes  would  be  damaged  permanently  if  they 
started to read before age six or even eight, and sloughed off  ex-
perience  from  schools  in  high-status  communities.  "We  are  not 
Brookline,"  said  one  school  official,  "and  it cannot  serve  as  our 
guide."  They rejected  tests  as  well,  not only because  they would 
force  children to compete against each other but because of their 
political  consequences.  Anger  from  parents  whose  child  had 
failed  the test by a  percentage point would be more intense than 
that generated by a  birthday that came a day after the cut-off. But 
even as  the board members tried to counter facts with other facts 
and turn the debate back to opinions which could not be argued 
so  easily,  they  recognized  a  genuine  community  protest.  The 
township  government  had  recently  rejected  petitions  on  two 
issues  raised  by  the  newcomers  and  had roused  the  ire  of many 
Levittowners.  Even  though  they  were  elected  on  a  nonpartisan 
basis,  the  school  board  members  were  Republicans,  and  yet  an-
other  rebuff could  only  help  the  Democratic  party.  Conversely, 
they  could  not  bring  themselves  to  give  in  to  "government  by 
petition" or to cross  professional  educators.  Indeed,  the staff  per-
suaded  the  board  that  "they  [the  proponents]  are  laymen;  they 
don't  really  know  what  it's  all  about,"  but  an  argument  that 
might  have  intimidated  most  Levittowners  did  not  impress  the 
proponents,  some  of  whom  were  better  educated  and  of  higher 
occupational status than the school administration. 

Caught in  the middle,  the  board stalled,  hoping that  the con-
troversy  would  abate  over  the  summer.  Although  this  did  not 
happen,  the stalling paid  off,  for  as  new  purchasers streamed  in, 
the lack of room for additional kindergartens served as an excuse 
to  turn  the  proponents down  without passing on  the validity of 
their demands.  Even  then, another wave of pressure might  have 
led to a  reversal,  particularly after the board met with  the Levitt 
officials  to seek their advice-and learned that they had no objec-
tion  to  the  change-but  also  because  all  along  the  board  had 
assumed  that  all  Levittowners  agreed  with  the  proponents  and 

The  New  School  System 

•  95  • 

might decide to petition en masse.  Now, one board member who 
was  active  in  the community and sat  on  other  township  boards, 
decided  to sample  Levittown opinion.  To his surprise,  he found 
that  many  Levittowners  shared  his  own  feeling  that  children 
should  be  kept  at home  as  long as  possible  and  that  the  propo-
nents  were  most  likely  only a  small  minority.  Once  he commu-
nicated  this  to  the  board,  it felt  strong enough  to  resist  further 
pressure. 

The  long  struggle  had  unified  the  protesting  parents  and,  a 
week after their defeat,  they organized a  Citizens' Committee for 
Better Schools, later renamed the Citizens' Association for  Public 
Schools  (C.A.P.S.),  because  some  members  felt  the  reference  to 
"better schools"  might  cast  aspersions  on  the  Levittown  system 
that  would  cost  the group  community support.  Once organized, 
C.A.P.S.  did  not  have  to.wait  long for  a  new  issue  on  which  to 
oppose the school board: overcrowding and class size. 

The schools had been planned on  the basis of population data 
collected  in  Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  to  permit classes  of  25-30 
pupils. But the new Levittown had attracted a  higher proportion 
of  larger  families  with  school-age  children,  and  the  parochial 
school would not take as many Catholic students as had originally 
been  expected.  As  a  result,  classes  in  the  second  neighborhood 
elementary  school  grew  to  35  or  more.  Levitt  altered  his  con· 
struction  plans  to  build  more  four-bedroom  and  fewer  three-
bedroom houses  in newer  "parks,"  but he was  unwilling to  plan 
more classrooms  in  the schools  for  these neighborhoods,  arguing 
that  the  overcrowding  would  be  temporary  and  assuming  that 
there  would  be  no objection  to  bigger classes  in  the  meantime. 
C.A.P.S., supported by the neighborhood PTA, asked that classes 
be  restored  to  their  original  size  by  busing  the  overflow  to  the 
first  school  (which  served  a  smaller  neighborhood).  However, 
the superintendent, suspecting that the two organizations did not 
reflect  majority  opinion,  conducted  an  attitude  survey,  asking 
parents  whether  they  preferred  busing  or  larger  classes. 1  Three 
fourths  of  parents  responding  favored  larger  classes,  and  the 
C.A.P.S. proposal was rejected. 2 

The Attack on the  School  Budget 

After this defeat, C.A.P.S., expecting to be permanently at log-
gerheads  with  the  school  system,  started  to  draft  what  it 
considered  to  be a  more  desirable curriculum.  The superinten-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

dent sought to reduce its antagonism, however, and asked several 
members  to  assist  him  on  school  board  work,  partly  to  coopt 
them,  partly  to  take  advantage  of  their  research  and  their  plan-
ning skills lacking in his own small staff.  In working together, the 
antagonists discovered some shared goals.  The superintendent ac-
tually supported  the C.A.P.S.'  desire  for  small classes,  and a  year 
later,  he  implemented  a  busing  plan  based  on  its  original  pro-
posal.  He also set up a  testing system  to enable children  to  enter 
kindergarten  before  the  age  of five  if  their parents requested  it. 
The sudden compatibility  was,  however,  primarily a  response 
to the development of a new and much stronger set of opponents 
to  the school  system:  Levittowners who demanded less  expensive 
schools devoted  to little more  than  basic  teaching functions,  and 
who  sought  to  prevent  the  establishment  of  additional  educa-
tional  services  which  both  the  administration  and  C.A.P.S  took 
for  granted  as  absolutely  necessary.  By  1g6o,  the  rising  school 
population and the hiring of auxiliary staff-for example, varsity 
coaches  and  a  school  psychologist--required  a  significant  in-
crease  in  the school  budget.  In Levittown, as  in most other small 
New Jersey communities,  this budget had to be approved by  the 
voters, and in February 1960, the first election in which a sizeable 
number  of  Levittowners  were  eligible  to  vote,  it  was  badly 
beaten.  Even  though  the  budget was  then  slightly cut,  and  even 
though Levitt was  then paying about 40 per cent of all municipal 
operating  expenditures,  the  tax  rate  rose  15  per  cent,  or  about 
$25 a year. 

When the new  tax bills went out in the summer of 1g6o, wide-
spread  grumbling  developed  about  school  expenditures,  too 
much  expansion  and  innovation,  and  the  high  salaries  of  the 
school  administration. To add fuel  to  the fire,  a  consultant hired 
by  the  Township  Committee  to  help reorganize  municipal  gov-
ernment predicted that taxes  in Levittown would  eventually rise 
from  about  $275  per  house  to  $645.  Opposition  to  the  rise  in 
school  taxes-which  accounted  for  about  three  quarters  of  the 
total  tax  bill--came  from  families  without  school-age  children 
and from  less  affluent  Levittowners who were  finding  the cost  of 
home  ownership  higher  than  expected.  The  most  vocal  attacks 
seemed to come from  Catholics,  who not only had lower incomes 
and more children  than Protestant and Jewish  Levittowners,  but 
Mho were at that time also  being asked to fund  the building of a 
llftochial school. 

The  New  School  System 

•  97  • 

In  the  fall  of  1960  the  first  Levittowners  became  eligible  to 
run  for  the  Board  of  Education,  and  leading  Catholics  in  the 
Democratic  party-whose  leadership was  large~y Catholic  to  be-
gin  with-began  to  look  for  candidates  for  the  1961  board  elec-
tion  who  would  vote  for  lower  school  budgets.  As  a  result, 
C.A.P.S. rallied behind the school board and superintendent and, 
by  the  beginning of  1961,  it had  emerged  as  their  principal  de-
fender  in  the  community.  The  proposed  budget  for  the  1961-
1962 school year was again higher than the previous one, and be-
cause  Levitt  could  no  longer  afford  to  subsidize  school  opera-
tions,  except  in  new  neighborhoods not yet on  the  tax rolls,  an-
other  tax increase was  threatening.  Eventually,  it came  to about 
$wo  per  house,  a  33  per cent  increase  over  the  previous  year's 
tax bill. 

By  county  tradition,  school  board  elections  were  "above  poli-
tics"  and  enough  Levittowners  agreed,  thus  discouraging  the 
Democrats  from  forming  a  slate.  Shortly  before  the  mandatory 
public  hearing  on  the  budget  and  the  election,  however,  three 
anti-tax  candidates,  two  of  them  leaders  of  the  Holy  Name  So-
ciety,  were  being  talked  up by many  Levittowners as  a  so-called 
"Catholic  slate."  The  year  before,  the  public  hearing  had  at-
tracted  only  a  handful  of  people,  but  in  February  1961,  more 
than  6oo,  the  largest  crowd  of  Levittowners  ever  to  meet  to-
gether,  jammed the auditorium in an  angry  mood  to  protest the 
proposed  budget.  The complaints  of  the  previous  year  were  re-
peated,  and  there  was  violent  criticism  of  the  superintendent's 
$18,ooo salary and a  newly suggested administrative post for  cur-
riculum planning. A group of engineers, constituting a  Commit-
tee  for  Efficient  Schools,  argued that all  the school  really needed 
was  teachers  and  that volunteers from  the community could  ad-
minister  and  plan.  Others  in  attendance  attacked  the  classroom 
size  policy,  pointing out that  the parochial school  was  providing 
adequate  education with  6o  children  per class;  and a  few  people 
even  objected  to  teachers' salaries,  the highest of which-for ten 
years'  experience-were  then approaching  the  community's  me-
dian income of $7 soo.  The opposition  to  teachers'  salaries came 
largely  from  a  handful  of  working  class  Levittowners  who  had 
never before encountered teachers earning more than they.  Most 
Levittowners  were  careful  not lo  object  to  teachers'  pay,  how-
ever,  and reserved  their disapproval  for  "administrators." 

The  meeting  was  extremely  bitter,  with  angry  charges  and 

•  !J8  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

exaggerated  claims  freely  traded.  The  conflict  was  clearly  be-
tween  the  haves  and  the  have-nots,  for  when  one  lone  budget 
supporter ended his speech,  he was asked how much he was  earn-
ing.  There  was  also  conflict,  as  in  the voluntary associations,  be-
tween  the  (few)  advocates  of  rapid  growth  who  wanted  a  fully 
staffed  school  system  now}  and  the 
(many)  proponents  of 
gradual  maturation,  although  they  were  only rationalizing their 
demand for tax reduction. 

to  be 

The  protesting  Levittowners  resented  particularly  what  they 
considered 
taxation  without  representation.  Despite 
C.A.P.S. suggestions that the school board  improve its "public re-
lations," the budget was printed only in the classified advertising 
pages  of the two county newspapers,  as  required  py law-where, 
of course,  few  people saw  it.  Since attendance at  board  meetings 
had  been  minimal and  the school  board still  had not become  ac-
quainted  with  many  Levittowners,  they  did  not  know  how  to 
communicate  with  or  represent  their  new  constituents.  At  the 
public hearing itself,  the board again objected to government by 
protest  and  petition,  reinforcing  the  Levittowners'  feeling  that 
they  lacked  control  over  their  own  elected  officials.  As  a  result, 
the  budget  was  voted  down  overwhelmingly  at  the  election, 
and the so-called Catholic slate replaced three of the old residents 
on  the  nine-man  school  board.  Subsequent  interviews  showed 
that  blue  collar  and  lowest  income  respondents  rejected  the 
budget in  largest numbers.  Unexpectedly,  the  most  poorly  edu-
cated parents  were  more  favorable  than  high  school  and  college 
graduates, as  were mothers--not fathers-of school-age  children, 
and go  per cent of the Catholics turned down the budget as com-
pared to 67  per cent of the Jews. 

Once  Levittowners had achieved even minority repre~entation 
on  the school  board,  the community's anger abated.  In  1962,  the 
school  budget  rose  again,  and  the  voters  again  rejected  it,  but 
they  did  not  complain  when  the  school  board  refused  to  cut  it 
afterwards and levied another 15  per cent tax increase.  Moreover, 
the  voters  elected  to  the  board  two  C.A.P.S.  leaders  who  had 
campaigned strenuously as a  pro-budget slate,  although they did 
poorly  in  the  first  neighborhoods  and  obtained  their  winning 
margin  from  the  more  recently  settled  ones.  Thanks  to  rising 
house  prices,  the  newer  arrivals  were  somewhat  more  affluent; 
also,  having  come  to  Levittown  after  the  initial  tax  hikes,  they 

The  New  School  System 

•  99  • 

were  not  faced  with  so  precipitous  an  increase  in  monthly  pay-
ments. 

After  public  concern  over  the  budget  had  died  down,  the 
C.A.P.S.-administration  alliance  disintegrated.  The  main  source 
of  conflict  now  was  the  superintendent's  unwillingness  to  plan 
for  the  future  and  to  find  some  way  of dealing with  the growth 
needs  of  the  system  and  the  annual  budget  rejections  by  the 
voters.  Indeed,  the  superintendent was  too sluggish  even  for  the 
remaining old  residents  on  the  school  board who  had  originally 
appointed  him,  and  in  the  fall  of  1962,  they  joined  forces  with 
the  two  C.A.P.S.  members  in  asking  him  to  resign.  Old  differ-
ences with  C.A.P.S.  about what made for  a  good school,  and  the 
priorities for  serving bright, average,  and slow  students also  con-
tributed to the superintendent's downfall, as did his reluctance to 
improve  "public  relations."  Yet  these  factors  were  only  sympto-
matic  of a  more basic  problem-his inability to adapt  his  previ-
ously  rural  experience  to  the  wishes  of  the  suburbanites.  He 
could,  perhaps,  not have avoided antagonizing the minority who 
wanted  an  upper  middle  class  school  system  or  the  less  affluent 
Levittowners  who  demanded .economy  above  all  and  asked  him 
to provide what he considered inferior education, but he did not 
really  understand  even  the  majority  of  his  constituents.  In  a 
speech  to  the  National  Education  Association,  he  mischaracter-
ized  Levittowners as  "descendants of second  or third generation 
immigrants  whose  national  customs  and  mores  are  very  slowly 
discarded,"  and  compared  them  to  his  previous  rural  constit-
uents, whom he eulogized as  "descendants of early Colonial stock 
or  the  solid  conservative  descendants  of  the  European  farmer . 
.  .  .  As  our  farms  grow  into  neighborhoods,  we  [must]  provide 
American,  not  foreign,  education,"  he  said,  as  if  his  role  was  to 
Americanize the  Levittowners. 

Ironically, and despite his ethnic misinterpretation, he differed 
little from  the lower  middle  class  majority  in  Levittown,  and  it 
agreed with most of his teaching policies.  Indeed, the overall con-
sensus  between  him  and  most  parents  about  what  class  culture 
was  to  be  transmitted  by  the  school  system  had  enabled  him  to 
implement  his  substantive  educational  ideas  without  much  op-
position.  Conversely,  if  the  Ford  Foundation  scheme  for  an 
upper middle class school  system had been put into practice, and 
the  school  had  consequently  required  what  lower  middle  class 

•  100  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

students  would  consider  excessive  learning demands,  they  prob-
ably  would  have  protested  to  their  parents,  who  in  turn  might 
have forced  the school  board to transform the system into a lower 
middle class institution. 

The  superintendent's  departure,  and  the  ability  of  the  two 
C.A.P.S.-affiliated  board  members  to  organize  a  coalition  that 
outvoted the advocates of economy, now encouraged the twosome 
to believe  that it could reorganize  the  school  system  closer  to  its 
wishes,  but this hope was  short-lived. The victory of  the C.A.P.S. 
members appeared certain when a liberal Pennsylvania educator, 
who shared many of their standards, was  found  to replace  the su-
perintendent. Shortly before he was to take office, however, Demo-
crats on the Township Council told him  they would fight any pol-
icies  that would result in higher taxes.  He decided  that  it would 
be  foolhardy to come  to Levittown to face  a continuous political 
battle,  and  resigned.  The  search  for  a  new  man  took  several 
months  but, eventually, a  more compatible New Jersey adminis-
trator  was  hired.  Meanwhile,  the  Democrats  then  in  control  of 
the  Township  Council  had  decided  that  the  traditional  taboo 
against  political  party  involvement  in  school  politics  was  less 
sacred to their constituents than lower  taxes,  and put pressure on 
the school  board for  budget cuts.  In  this  atmosphere,  C.A.P.S.'s 
short-lived  influence came  to an end at  the next school  election. 
After one of the C.A.P.S.-affiliated board members had left Levit-
town for a  better job in another state,  the remaining member be-
came  the  sole  target  for  attacks  on  "better schools"  and  higher 
taxes.  Although  the  newer  neighborhoods  provided  some  sup-
port,  she  trailed  behind the other candidates and the brief reign 
of the cosmopolitans was over. 

THE EVOLUTION  OF THE SCHOOL SYSTEM 

Recurring  struggles  over  the  amount  and  allocation  of  school 
funds  did  not  prevent  the  rapid  development  of  a  functioning 
school  system  in  Levittown.  By September  1965,  more than Sooo 
students  were  attending  five  elementary  schools,  two  junior  (or 
middle)  ones,  and  a  high  school,  the  latter  built  entirely  from 
public  funds.  These  schools  included  all  the  curricular  and  ex-
tracurricular  accouterments  one  would  expect  in  a  modern 
middle  (but not upper middle)  class  suburb;  the education  they 
provided  would  prepare  the  students  for  about  the  same  white 

The  New  School  System 

•  101  • 

collar,  technical,  and  subprofessional  jobs  held  by  their  parents 
and for  the  lower  middle  class  culture that  dominated  the com-
munity.  Perhaps  the  schools  favored  the  restrictive  subculture 
more  than  the  expansive;  the  course  offerings  were  quite  tradi-
tional, and there was none of the "life adjustment" and "learning 
to get along with  the group" approach that Whyte had found  in 
Park  Forest. 3  The  teachers  gave  their  students  individual  atten-
tion  and  demanded  neither  superior  intellectual  achievement 
nor oppressive memorizing. As a  result,  the dropout rate was  in· 
finitesimal,  and  about  50  per cent  of  the  graduates  enrolled  ii] 
college,  although  in  1963  a  third  of  them  chose  junior colleges 
and  teachers'  colleges,  and  only  5  per  cent  went  to  "name" 
schools.  It  was,  as  one  unhappy  C.A.P.S.  member  put  it,  "the 
school system  the community deserved."  Interviews conducted in 
1961  suggested,  however,  that  the majority was  pleased.  Seventy-
five  per cent of all  parents and  87  per cent of non-Catholic ones 
felt  their children were either learning better or about as  well  as 
in their previous community, and 75  per cent of  the parents con-
sidered  the Levittown system  superior  to  the  one  they  had  come 
from,  praising  it for  better teachers  and  higher  performance re-
quirements from  the children. 4 

A minority Catholic bloc had seemingly settled into the school 
board  and  opposed  many  majority  decisions,  but  the  conflict 
never  reached  the  intensity or  the longevity  that had  developed 
in  Levittown,  New York,  where a  large,  predominantly Catholic 
group fought  the budget and also accused  the system of Commu-
nist  leaning for  many  years. 6  Levittown,  New  Jersey  still  strug-
gled with an increasing school  population and rising budgets, re-
quiring a  6  per cent  tax  increase  in  1964  and  a  16  per cent  in-
crease in 1965. In addition, insufficient classroom space continued 
to  be a  problem,  possibly  requiring an  eventual  enlargement of 
the  elementary  schools.  However,  it  seemed  as  if  the  Levit-
towners  preferred larger classes  to  rising  taxes. 

Actually,  school  expenditures could not  have  been considered 
unreasonable;  in  1965,  they  amounted  to  $465  per student,  less 
than  in  all  but  two  of  the  seven  townships  surrounding  Levit-
town.  Even  taxes  were  not  exorbitant,  amounting  in  1965  to 
$425-$530,  depending  on  the  house  type.  The  actual  tax  rate 
was  only  about  8  per  cent  higher  than  in  1959,  and  what  had 
caused  the precipitous  tax  rise,  a  total of  122  per cent since  that 
year,  was  the  withdrawal  of  the  Levitt  subsidies  which  paid  for 

•  102  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

almost  half  of  all  municipal  expenditures  during  the  first  two 
years. 6  Some Levittowners were undoubtedly hard pressed  to pay 
the higher taxes,  especially on  top of increases  in the cost  of  liv-
ing  and  the  rising  expenses  of  maintaining  their  houses.  For 
many, however, it was not so much the money as  the idea of hav-
ing to pay for a school their children did not attend-and then to 
have  to fund  the parochial  school as well,  and  for  others, of hav-
ing to support a  system  with  more  "frills"  than  they  wanted  for 
their  children.  These  parents  were  essentially  objecting  to  a 
school  that taught  the culture of their more affluent and higher-
status neighbors, a culture which  they  neither wanted  to finance 
nor  to  have  their  children  adopt.  Since  education  is  supposedly 
not  only  above  politics  but also  classless,  the  class  conflict-for 
that is what it was-never came to the surface, but it pervaded the 
definitional  struggle  nevertheless. 

Even  so,  the less  affluent Catholic population was  not quite as 
threatened either financially or in terms of status as its equivalent 
on Long Island-where half the people were blue collar workers 
and  the cosmopolitan opposition,  as  well,  was  larger.  This prob-
ably  explains  why  the  panic,  the  anti-Communist  hysteria,  and 
the  witch-hunting  never  developed. 7  In  1963,  a  Birchite  group 
did attack the school  board for Communist sympathies but it re-
ceived  no  support  from  other  Levittowners  and  quickly  faded 
out of the picture. Dobriner describes Levittown, Long Island, as 
"bimodal"  in  class,  and  Catholic  blue  collar  anger  there  may 
have  been  heightened  by  relative  deprivation  vis-a-vis  a  single 
class  enemy,  whereas  Levittown,  New  Jersey,  was  more  "tri-
modal,"  and on some  issues,  working class  residents  found allies 
among lower middle class ones. The Long Island community was 
almost  ten  years  old  when  the  conflict  reached  its  peak,  and  it 
may also  be  that  the  relative  newness  and  the  concurrent  reser-
voir  of  residents'  patience  muted  it  in  the  New Jersey commu-
nity. 

NOTES 

1.  Despite  the  principal's  careful  screening  of  prospective  PTA  of-
ficers,  this PTA regularly criticized school policy and, at one point, 
even  proposed  secession  from  the  national  PTA  to  enable  it  to 
fight the school system. The proposal was  beaten by  pressure from 

The  New  School  System 

•  103  • 

county  and  state  PTA leaders  and  the  lack  of  sufficient  support 
from  the  neighborhood membership. 

2.  My reanalysis of the survey suggested that parents who liked  their 
children's  teachers  opposed  busing;  those  who  disliked  them  fa-
vored it,  and class size was of lesser importance to  them. 

3·  Whyte (1956), pp. 387-392. 
4·  Among  Catholic  parents  with  children  in  public  school,  25  per 
cent  reported  improvement  in  school  performance;  22  per  cent, 
deterioration;  and 53  per cent,  no change.  Among non-Catholics, 
the figures were  29  per cent,  13  per cent,  and 58  per cent,  respec-
tively. 

5·  Dobriner  (1963),  pp.  113-118.  See  also  Wattel,  pp.  306-311,  and 

Orzack and Sanders. 

6.  Altogether,  the builder contributed about two million dollars be-
tween  1959 and 1963. See League of Women Voters,  Willingboro. 
New Jersey,  p.  14. 

7·  Dobriner  (1963),  p.  100.  Also,  the  tax  rate  in  Levittown,  Long 

Island,  rose  a full  784 per cent between  1947  and  1962. 

D 

Chapter Six 

D 

THE  EMERGENCE  OF 
PARTY  POLITICS 

D 

D 

EVEN THOUGH THE FORMATION  OF THE SCHOOL SYSTEM  WAS  MARKED 
by recurring conflict, the students were for all practical purposes a 
captive constituency, which limited the extent of the definitional 
struggles.  Municipal  government  represented  all  Levittowners, 
however,  and had to cope  with all  their diversities.  Nowhere was 
the origin  process  more  chaotic  than  among and  within  the  po-
litical  parties. 

When  Levitt  first  purchased  the  land,  Willingboro  was  gov-
erned  by  a  three-man  Township  Committee,  each  member 
elected  for  three  years,  and  by  an  appointed  township  solicitor 
who  drafted-and  often  suggested-legislation  and  supervised 
the  Committee's few  administrative and executive  tasks.  Levitt's 
arrival  did  not  immediately change  this  pattern.  He  built roads 
and other municipal  facilities,  the Township Committee's major 
function  being to review  the firm's  plans. 

Until  the  Levittowners  moved  in,  the  township  was  a  one-
party  community,  having  been  Republican  since  its  inception, 
and as  everybody knew everyone else,  there was  no need for  elec-
tion campaigns or even for  an active  local  party.  After  Levitt ar-
rived,  the  community  and  the  party  split  into  pro- and  anti-
Levitt factions,  the former headed by  the old elite,  the latter by a 
conservative  ex-New  Yorker  who  belonged  to  the  opposing  fac-
tion  in  the  county  Republican  party.  An  Episcopalian  of  Cath-
olic  birth  and a  public  relations  man  by  trade,  he  disagreed  on 

• 

104 

• 

The  Emergence  of  Party  Politics 

•  105  • 

almost  every  issue  with  the  Methodist  and  Presbyterian  farmers 
on  the  other  side,  particularly  on  the  question  of  liquor,  he 
favoring a  wet community,  they a  dry one.  The newcomer soon 
came  to  support  Levitt,  but  his  other  differences  with  the  old 
elite remained, and were to  affect  Levittown politics for  the next 
two years, especially after he was chosen Mayor. 

By  the  time  the  Levittowners  came,  everyone  knew  that 
change  was  just  around  the  corner,  for  the  first  ones  would  be 
eligible  to  vote  in  the  April  1959  primary.  They  would  out-
number  the  old  residents  by  1960,  at  the  latest;  and  eventually 
they might, as  residents  of the largest  community  in  the county, 
dominate  its  politics  as  well.  No  one  realized  this  more  clearly 
than  four  young  Democratic  hopefuls,  all  previously  active  in 
county  politics--two as  Republicans--who were among the  first 
purchasers in Levittown.  Having known each other  before,  they 
caucused  quickly,  constituted  themselves  a  steering  committee, 
and in December organized the township's first  Democratic club. 
Shortly thereafter,  they began a  house-to-house survey to look for 
Democratic  voters  and  workers. 1  In  March  the  Republicans, 
spurred  on  by a  lone  Levittowner,  buried  the  factional  hatchets 
long  enough  to  organize  a  formal  Republican  club.  Both  clubs 
immediately  started  to  look  for  candidates  for  the  November 
Township  Committee  election,  but  neither  party  knew  what 
kind  of a  candidate  might appeal  to  the new  voters.  The Demo-
crats  used  survey  results,  and  judging  from  the  enthusiastic  re-
sponses  among  working  class  residents  (middle  class  ones  were 
likely  to call  themselves  independents),  they concluded he ought 
to  be a  "working man."  The  Republicans  knew  almost  nothing 
about the Levittowners, but the  Mayor's faction,  also considering 
them  to  be working class,  selected  a  Catholic  salesman,  whereas 
the old elite guessed  high  and  picked a  Protestant  Harvard  Law 
School  graduate.  Eventually,  both  these  prospective  candidates 
withdrew to avoid a  primary fight  and  the nomination went to a 
lower middle class Catholic insurance salesman. 

While  the  parties  were  readying  their  nominees  for  the  No-
vember  election,  the  Township  Committee  labored  in  near-
anonymity.  It  passed  a  variety  of  uncontroversial  ordinances, 
partly  for  the  newcomers  but  also  to  protect  the  old  residents 
against possible  "undesirables" among the  Levittowners.  For ex-
ample,  a  Police  Department  had  been  established  just  before 
they arrived, and a  year  later an  ordinance was  passed  requiring 

•  106  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

the  registration  of  residents  with  prison  records.  Shortly  there-
after,  some  county  people  considered  the  establishment  of  a 
mental  health  clinic,  reportedly  for  the  newcomers.  Few  Levit-
towners  went  to  Township  Committee  meetings,  but  then  few 
had  expressed  civic  or  political  aspirations  on  the  mail  ques-
tionnaire  before  they  arrived.  More  questionnaire  respondents 
had wanted "a voice in community affairs,"  however, and the op-
portunity to raise it soon arrived. 

Two seemingly innocuous issues,  both generated by the builder 
and  both  arousing  political  and  status  fears  among  the  new-
comers,  suddenly  placed  the  Township  Committee  in  the  fore· 
front  of public attention.  First,  Levitt acted  to eliminate a  deed 
restriction  which  forbade  nonresident  doctors  from  purchasing 
houses  solely  for  office  use.  When  he  sought  to  have  the  Town-
ship  Committee  amend  the  zoning  ordinance-as  he  generally 
tried  to  do for  all  restrictions  that could be legitimized  and  thus 
strengthened  by  municipal  action-the  already  resident  doctors 
protested. Since there was at that time still  a shortage of patients, 
they  feared  competition  from  nonresidents,  many  of  whom 
would be specialists.  They were joined by  homeowners,  many of 
them working class,  who felt  that.nonresident doctors would take 
only their money,  whereas residents  of the community would re-
spect  them. 2  But  their  major  concern  was  that  if  houses  were 
bought by nonresident  professionals,  their blocks would soon  be 
semicommercial and the community would suffer the same status 
deterioration  that  had  taken  place-for other reasons--in  Levit-
town,  Pennsylvania.3  Distrustful  of  the  builder and  the  old  resi-
dents  on  the  Township  Committee,  they  claimed  that  the  ordi-
nance  might  let  in  barbers,  beauticians,  and  other  low-status 
quasi-professionals  aswell.  "I  make  $7ooo  a  year,"  said  one.  "I 
came  here  for  a  residential  community;  don't  cheapen  this  area 
by bringing doctors in  to practice.  All we  want for  our own class 
is a residential area." 

There  was  considerable  validity  in  the  homeowners'  expecta-
tion  that  the  Committee  would  be  unresponsive,  for  rumors  to 
this  effect  had already circulated.  When they came  to  the  public 
hearing 150 persons strong, with 450 signatures on a  petition and 
20  people  to  testify  against  the  amendment,  the  Committeemen 
listened  in  silence  and  then  summarily  rejected  their  demands. 
Like  the  school  board,  the  Committee  was  opposed  to  govern-
ment  by  petition and was  so  fearful  about  its  first  confrontation 

The  Emergence  of  Party  Politics 

•  107  • 

with  the  newcomers  that  the  police  were  ordered  out  in  full 
force,  ringing  the  meeting  room  to  forestall  possible  violence. 
The  Mayor  favored  the  zoning  amendment  (to  attract  special-
ists),  and besides,  the Committee intended, as  it had  in  the  past, 
to  satisfy  the  builder's  wishes  whenever  it  could,  feeling  that as 
he  was  the  largest  landowner  and  the  determiner  of  the  town-
ship's future,  blocking him would only hurt the community. The 
Committee  did  not  give  final  approval  to  the  amendment  that 
night,  for  the Mayor saw an opportunity to  embarrass the leader 
of  the  old  elite,  then  Chairman  of  the  Planning  Board  and  the 
Mayor's  bitter political  enemy,  by  passing the  buck  to his  board 
for action. 

What  150 people could not achieve at  the Township Commit-
tee meeting a smaller group was able to do at the Planning Board 
a  month  later.  The  planning consultant suggested  that  the  mat-
ter  be  postponed  until  the  zoning ordinance  could  be  rewritten 
entirely to conform with a  preliminary master plan  that had just 
been  approved.  The  board  moved  to  accept  his  suggestion,  but 
the  opponents  suspected  a  stall  that  would  lead  to  the  eventual 
admission  of nonre~ident doctors and angrily demanded  that the 
board  take  immediate  action.  -Momentarily  intimidated,  the 
board gave  in and  voted  against nonresident  doctors.  When  the 
issue was  then returned to  the Township Committee, the nonres-
ident doctors  came  with  1200  signatures,  and a  compromise was 
passed,  allowing  only  doctors  to  purchase  houses  and  no  more 
than two  to a house.  Both political parties refused to take a stand 
on  the  controversial  issue,  not  knowing  how  the  Levittowners 
felt;  instead, they asked the Levittown Civic Association to hold a 
"nonpartisan  debate"  to  find  out.  Still  run  entirely  by  old  resi-
dents,  the  Association  too  was  fearful  of controversy,  an<;!  when 
Levittowners refused  to come out for  noncontroversial  meetings, 
it expired. 

No sooner had  the  "doctor  issue"  been  resolved  than  another 
arose--on  the sale  of liquor in  the township-and the same  pat-
tern  was  repeated.  Again,  the  Levitt  organization  provided  the 
impetus.  Willingboro  had  been  dry  since  its  inception,  but  the 
builder wanted to include a restaurant-bar and a  package store in 
his  shopping  center.  He  requested  an  ordinance  to  that  effect, 
and  once  again,  the  Township  Committee  acquiesced  after  a 
stormy  public  hearing.  The  opposition  consisted  primarily  of 
"drys"  from  the  Methodist  church  and  many  Levittowners  who 

•  lo8  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

had objected to nonresident doctors and now envisioned bars and 
liquor stores on every comer. Again  they feared a  status decline, 
using  Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  as  an  example,  and  again  they 
exaggerated  the  consequences  of  the  ordinance.  Angered  by  the 
last  meeting  and  by  the  wild  charges  leveled  at  them  from  an 
audience of "cranks and Democrats," the Committeemen made it 
clear that they had not paid attention  to  the protesting witnesses, 
for  after  the  public  hearing was  ended  they  voted  unanimously 
for the ordinance without even a preliminary caucus. 

Again,  both  political  parties stayed out of the issue  because  of 
its  controversial  nature,  but  they could  not avoid  internal  splits 
over it.  Most Democrats were wet, and the leaders expected cam-
paign contributions from  liquor dealers.  Many of the opponents 
to  both  nonresident doctors and liquor dealers were  also  Demo-
crats,  however.  Led by an old resident who was  angry over being 
denied  the  Township Committee candidacy  after  many years  as 
the lone township Democrat, they set up a separate faction  in  the 
Democratic camp. Th_e  Republican factions  had been divided on 
this issue  previously, and two leaders who opposed the Mayor or-
ganized  a  referendum  to  overturn  the  Township  Committee's 
decision.  Funded  by  liquor  dealers  outside  the  township  who 
wanted  no  competition,  and  drawing  workers  from  the  Metho-
dist church,  they campaigned for  a  dry town,  and at the  Novem-
ber  election,  won  by  a  6  to  4  margin. 4  That  election  also  pro-
duced a resounding Democratic victory,  with a  go  per cent  turn-
out giving the party 6o per cent of the vote. 

The outcome was less a victory for  the Democratic party than a 
protest against  the  Mayor's  and  the Township Committee's lack 
of  responsiveness  to  the  new  community  and  the  Republican 
party's  domination  by  the  old residents.  It was  also,  of course,  a 
vote against  any governmental  action  to reduce the community's 
status.  However, not all  Levittowners felt threatened, for another 
referendum,  initiated  by  both  parties  at  the  request  of  the 
builder,  changed  the  legal  name  of  the  township  from  Willing-
boro to Levittown. Many middle class residents preferred the old 
name  because  of  Levittown's  national  image  as  a  low-prestige 
community,  but  enough  of  them  joined  working  class  Levit-
towners  who  felt  Levitt deserved  recognition  for  having  built a 
town  in  which  they  could  afford  to  live,  and  the  name  change 
passed by a small margin. 

The  Emergence  of  Party  Politics 

•  109  • 

THE REORGANIZATION OF TOWNSIDP  GOVERNMENT 

Once  the  voters  had  expressed  their  disapproval  of  the  old  re-
gime,  and  had  placed  one  Levittowner  in  its  midst,  they  lost 
immediate  interest  in  the  affairs  of  government.  Over  the  next 
two  years  the  Township  Committee  saw  to  its  own  internal 
problems  by  setting  up  a  civil  service  structure;  passed  ordi-
nances  to  protect  the  residents  from  traffic  dangers,  garbage 
dumps, and the like;  and approved Levitt's plans for  future  sub-
divisions-matters  which  people  took  for  granted  or  which  af-
fected only a  small  number or only future  purchasers.  Of the  65 
ordinances  passed  between  October  1958  and  May  1960,  just  9 
per cent were  in direct response  to citizens'  requests,  principally 
to  approve church  and  associational  activities  regulated  by  mu-
nicipal  ordinances  and  to  change  the  building  code  to  permit 
the  construction  of  patios.6  Few  were  controversial,  and  ordi-
nances which could not be passed unanimously were either tabled 
or rewritten until unanimity was  achieved. 

The only significant  innovation was  the  reorganization  of  the 
Township  Committee.  From  the  time  Levittown  was  occupied, 
incumbent  Committeemen  and  leading  politicians realized  that 
the Committee had to be expanded, for otherwise there would be 
too much work for  individual members and it would  be difficult 
to  get  candidates  for  the  office.  There  was,  however,  no  agree-
ment over one detail:  who would direct day-to-day governmental 
activities.  Both  parties  favored  a  strong-mayor  form  of  govern-
ment,  for  the new  town  required  leadership,  the  parties needed 
symbolic  and  real  leaders,  and  a  strong  mayor  could  generate 
patronage.  It had already  become clear  that  neither  party could 
attract enough volunteer manpower for election campaigns;  both 
looked  forward  to  a  mayor  who  could  provide  them  with  loyal 
workers.  But  the  politicians  could  not  come  out  for  a  strong 
mayor.  Even  before the first  election, old residents had  talked of 
a city manager, mostly to forestall a Democratic takeover. 6  When 
the Democrats promised, as  part of their 1959 election campaign, 
to set up a Study Group to consider reorganization of the govern-
ment, many people already favored a city manager, for what with 
rising  taxes,  his  professional  skill  would  lead  to  efficient  and  in-
expensive  government.  As  one  man, who  himself  had  ambitions 

•  110  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

for  becoming mayor, admitted,  "A city manager is  a  good  thing; 
we  need  a  college  man,  a  specialist  in  there  to  do  the  job.  We 
have to get someone from outside." 

Even so,  the Township Committee was  to pick the members of 
the Study Group and could, presumably, have packed it with ad-
vocates  of a  strong mayor.  In  the  spring of  tg6o,  however,  both 
parties were so disorganized that none of the six chosen had close 
party  ties.  Also,  the  title  "Study  Group"  made  it  almost  man-
datory  to  name  well-educated  men,  and  neither  party  could 
afford to appoint professional politicians. The Republicans chose 
two  businessmen,  as  well  as  a  banker  and  an  accountant;  the 
Democrats,  a  lawyer  who  had  just  become  a  judge  and  a  social 
worker;  and  four  of  the  six  had  already  decided  privately  to 
recommend  a  city  manager,  each  on  his  own,  before  the  Study 
Group ever met.  Nevertheless,  a  conscientious  survey  of all  pos-
sible  alternatives  preceded  the  unanimous  vote  for  city-manager 
government.  The  Group  also  recommended  a  five-man  Town-
ship Council to be elected on a  partisan basis.  Most Study Group 
members would as  soon  have recommended a  nonpartisan Coun-
cil, but as  businessmen and professionals they found it difficult to 
think through the issue  and acquiesced  in  the social worker's op· 
position  to nonpartisan  elections.  In effect,  then,  one man deter-
mined the continued existence  of national  parties  in  Levittown. 
At  this  point,  neither  the  Study  Group  nor  the  politicians 
knew  whether  the  voters  would  approve  the  city  manager,  and 
expecting opposition,  the Study Group decided  that  it would be 
necessary to "sell" its recommendation to the voters. A  hired con-
sultant  wrote  a  strongly  worded  document  which  argued  that  a 
city  manager  was  essential  because,  by  his  calculations,  the 
annual  tax  bill  might well  rise  to  $645  a  house.  Although work-
ing  class  Levittowners  were  doubtful  about  a  city  manager--as 
they were about all experts and outsiders-they and everyone else 
at  once  turned  their  attention  to  the  tax  estimate.  Corning just 
after new and higher tax bills had been mailed out, this estimate 
created a  furor  and later,  in February  tg6t,  provided  a  rallying 
point for opponents to the school  budget.  If any popular contro-
versy  existed  about  the  desirability  of  a  city  manager,  it  now 
faded into the background. Just before the election, the dissident 
Democrats  tried  unsuccessfully  to  organize  against  the  Study 
Group's  recommendation.  The  Republicans  pointed  out  that 
they  had  been  for  a  city  manager  before  the  Study  Group ever 

The  Emergence  of  Party  Politics 

•  111 

• 

met,  the  Democrats  said  unenthusiasticaiiy  that  governmental 
reorganization was  the will  of the people, and it carried by more 
than  4  to  1  in  the  November  1960  election.  The  Study  Group 
had  no  advance  idea  of  what  people  wanted,  but  a  fortuitous 
combination of circumstances, aided by the inability of the polit-
ical  parties  either  to  carry  out or  to  oppose  the  wishes  of  their 
constituents,  had  brought  about  the  type  of  government  most 
Levittowners  undoubtedly  favored,  and  a  year  later  the  new 
Township Council  and  the  City  Manager  took  office. 

THE UPS  AND DOWNS OF PARTY POLITICS 

Even  though  the three Township Committeemen were  not  talk-
ing  to  each  other  in  the  spring  of  1960,  they  had  to  suppress 
their personal and political hostilities in order to run the govern-
ment.  The political parties had  no routine and  continuing func-
tion,  however;  their  job  was  to  find  the  constituencies,  candi-
dates,  workers,  and  issues  that  would  produce  election  victories 
and a  viable  party  organization.  This  they  failed  to  do,  for  the 
1959  Democratic victory was foliowed  by a  Republican landslide 
in  1960, a Democratic landslide in  1961,  a  Republican victory  in 
1963,  and a  standoff  in  1965;  and  after  each  election,  the  party 
organization was sure  to suffer,  particularly among  the  Republi-
cans.7 

The constant political flux was caused partly by the parties' re-
lationship  to  the  county  organization-traditionally  the  deter-
mining  one  in  New  Jersey  politics-and  the  resulting  involve-
ment in county issues and factions which had nothing to do with 
Levittown but from which the local groups could not disentangle 
themselves.  Nonpartisan  elections  would  have  helped,  although 
they  would  also  have  deprived  local  candidates  of  county  and 
state  assistance.  They would  not,  however,  have  eliminated  the 
flux,  for  many  Levittowners  considered  themselves  independ-
ents  who  decided  each  November  for  whom  they  would  vote, 
depending on the choice of candidates and the then salient issues. 
Local  politics  thus  became  a  never  ending  attempt  to  develop 
stable  constituencies  and  organizations  among  a  population 
which  regularly  changed  its  political  allegiances  in  response  to 
the conditions of the moment. 

The Democrats were more successful  than  the Republicans in 
building a stable party organization. Being almost entirely Levit-

•  112  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

towners, they were able to.avoid conflict with the old residents, at 
least  at  the  local  level,  and  being Democrats  they  had  an  easier 
time  finding  party  workers.  Such  people  seem  to  be  recruited 
principally  from  working  class  or  ethnic  backgrounds,  groups 
which gravitate more often to the Democrats than  to the Repub-
licans. The Levittown Democrats had attracted a number of men 
who  had  either  been  active  in  politics  previously  or  were  inter-
ested in becoming active;  many of them were of Irish and Italian 
working class  or Jewish  middle  class  origins,  who  had  no  other 
organizational  interests  and  were  ready  to  devote  time  and 
.energy  to  the  party.  A  permanent  cadre  encouraged  permanent 
leadership, enabling one of the four  party founders  to wrest con-
trol  from  his companions after the  1959  victory.  An  experienced 
politician,  he  weathered  attempts  to depose  him  after  each  elec-
tion defeat, and he remains the party leader to this day. 

The Republicans attracted some  of  the same  sort  of  people:  a 
handful  of  Protestant working class  Levittowners and some  Irish 
Catholic  middle  class  ones  who  moved  out  of  the  Democratic 
party as  they  left  the  city.  But many of  the  Republican  workers 
were  temporary  "volunteers."  These  were  lower  middle  and 
upper  middle  class  managers  and  salesmen,  who  were  active  in 
service clubs and other voluntary associations  but had little taste 
for  party  politics,  coming  in  only  to  help a  particular candidate 
and  then  returning  to  their  nonpolitical  groups.  The  resulting 
conflict  between  the  volunteers  and  the  regular  workers  pre-
vented  the  development  of  permanent  party  leadership,  and  it 
changed hands after almost every election, win or lose. 

Stable  party  leadership  alone  could  neither  produce  election 
victories  nor  prevent  factionalism,  however.  Without  loyal  con-
stituencies and a set of issues on which to build a persuasive party 
image,  the  parties  were  forced  in  each  election  to  fight  internal 
battles as well as  their opponents, and most of these struggles rep-
resented  attempts  by  various  class  blocs  to  obtain  power  and  to 
shape  the  party,  the  government,  and  the  community  in  their 
own image. 

In the spring of  1960,  both parties were split.  The Democratic 
party  leader,  who  stood  for  a  wet  community  and  cooperation 
with Levitt, was opposed by the group who had attacked the non-
resident  doctor and  liquor  ordinances  and  who  wanted  to  fight 
the  government  and  the  builder  in  order  to  make  certain  that 
Levittown  would assure  them  the  lower  middle class  status  they 

The  Emergence  of  Parly  Politics 

•  113  • 

thought they had purchased with their houses.  The Republicans, 
still largely old residents, were split by county factional  fights and 
lacked both a  leader and a  candidate for  the  November election. 
At  the  last  minute,  the  regular  Republican  party  workers,  then 
in control  of the organization, found a  candidate,  but the oppos-
ing  faction  thought  he  could  not  win  and  persuaded  a  Junior 
Chamber  of  Commerce  leader  to  run  against  him.  In  the  pri-
mary,  both organization candidates won.  Shortly  thereafter,  they 
both  resigned;  the  Republican,  for  business  reasons;  the  Demo-
crat,  a  tough  young  Italian  businessman,  because  he  threatened 
the  party  leader's  control,  was  unpopular with  the  workers,  and 
had  allegedly  misrepresented  his  educational  background.  If it 
came out in the open, the Republicans could expose him and his 
party to charges of dishonesty. 

Until  then,  neither  party had  an  issue  to catch  the  interest of 
the electorate. Although the community was concerned about the 
first  increase  in  taxes,  municipal  expenditures were of minor im-
portance,  and  the  parties  realized;  as  did  the  Levittowners,  that 
the  tax  rate  depended  on  the  actions  of  the  school  board.  The 
new  Democratic  candidate  gave  the  Republicans  the  issue  they 
needed.  The  Democrats  knew  after  the  1959  victory  that  they 
would  have  to  offer  middle  class  candidates,  but  these  were  in 
short  supply  and,  at  the  last  minute,  they  picked  one  who  was 
also  a  veteran  county  politician.  The  Republicans  named  the 
J .C. C.  leader,  who  lacked  political  experience  of any  kind.  Bor-
rowing the issue of "bossism," which  had been raised  against  the 
Democratic  party  leader  by  his  party's  dissidents,  the  Republi-
cans  campaigned  on  the  theme  that  their  candidate  would  be 
above politics and would prevent the emergence of an urban po-
litical  machine  in  Levittown. 8  This  plank,  the  personal  attrac-
tiveness  of the candidate and his running mate  (an officer  in  the 
Holy  Name Society),  attracted a  number of volunteers-most of 
them associational colleagues of  the candidates-who took charge 
of the campaign.  The campaign manager, also  a  young Catholic, 
rented  a  bookmobile,  renamed  it  a  "bandwagon,"  and  rode  it 
through the streets of Levittown offering coffee, doughnuts, and a 
chance to meet the candidates in an  informal,  almost  neighborly 
encounter.  The Democrats could not fight  the  image of bossism, 
and although John F.  Kennedy visited  Levittown just before the 
election, his gesture did not impress the voters. The Republicans 
took  all  election  districts  and  55  per cent of  the  total  vote.  The 

•  114  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

independents,  who  were  decisive,  had  rejected  alleged  machine 
politics for what many called "a young Eisenhower." 

In  1961,  the  situation  was  reversed.  Government  reorganiza-
tion  had  been  approved  at  the  1960  election,  and  with  the  City 
Manager  there  to  do  most  of  the  administrative  work  and  the 
old  residents  safely  out  of  the  picture,  neither  party  lacked 
candidates  for  the  new  five-man  Township  Council.  This  time, 
the  Democratic  leader sensed what  the  electorate wanted.  Taxes 
had  become  the  issue,  and  he  selected  a  slate described  as  quali-
fied  to  work  with  the  City  Manager  in  the  overriding  task  of 
keeping  taxes  low,  including an accountant, a  cost  engineer, and 
two other white collar workers.  He also  made sure that  the slate 
included a  Protestant,  a  Jew,  and a  man  from  the most  recently 
settled neighborhoods. The Republicans fared less well. Once the 
1960  election  was  won,  the  volunteers  had  departed,  and  the 
small band of working class party workers took over.  They forced 
out the  victorious campaign  manager and put up a  slate consist-
ing  largely  of  their  own  people.  Feeling  that  this  slate  lacked 
both the skill  and the status to win,  the ex-campaign manager or-
ganized  an  opposing  ticket  of  "quality"  candidates,  several  of 
them Catholics and almost all with high-level white collar or pro-
fessional  jobs.  If the  independents among  the  Levittowners  had 
voted  in  the  primaries,  the  "quality slate"  might  have  won,  but 
they  did  not,  and  the  organization  candidates  of  both  parties 
were victorious. 9  The Democrats  hammered on  the need  for  tax 
reduction and the qualifications of their candidates for achieving 
it,  keeping  the  party leader behind the scenes  to forestall  further 
charges of "bossism." They easily beat the  Republican ticket in a 
lackluster election. 

With no election  scheduled  for  the  next  two years  the  Demo-
crats  consolidated  their  hold  over  township  government  with 
municipal  appointees,  and  also  strengthened  their  image  as  the 
party of low  taxes  by forcing a  cut in  the school  budget after the 
February  1963  school  election. 10  It seemed as  if Levittown might 
become  permanently  Democratic,  but  now  it  was  that  party's 
turn  to misjudge the electorate.  Shortly before  the  1963  election 
the  Township  Council  approved  a  zoning  amendment  permit-
ting Levitt to  build garden apartments in  the community.  Many 
Levittowners felt that these would bring in more transient, lower-
status  families  with  many  children,  which  would  require  yet 
higher school  taxes.  They also objected to the Council's policy of 

The  Emergence  of  Party  Politics 

•  115  Ill 

helping the builder out of sales  difficulties.  Most  important, they 
resented the Council's failure to listen to their protest against the 
amendment  :tt  a  public  hearing.  Once  again  Levittown  politi-
cians were  punished by the voters  for  the  same  unresponsiveness 
to status fears  that had defeated the old residents in 1959, and the 
Republicans  were swept  into office,  taking control  of the  Town-
ship Council. 

Prior  to  this victory,  the  Republican  party had  been virtually 
moribund.  The  old  workers  had  left  and,  for  a  time,  were  re-
placed  by  the  Birchites  who  had  attacked  the  school  board  for 
Communist sympathies.  In  1962,  they led an energetic campaign 
against  fluoridation  of  the  town's  water  supply,  but  when  the 
voters  rejected  their  appeals  by a  considerable  margin  they  dis. 
appeared,  and  a  new  group  of  more  liberal  Republicans  carne 
into the party. 

The 1963  election ballot also included a referendum to change 
the  township's  name  back  to  Willingboro.  Initiated  by  C.A.P.S. 
leaders who  had also  led the fight  against garden apartments,  the 
referendum  was  supported  by  middle  class  people  who  felt  the 
old name was  more  prestigious and  would  repair  the damage  to 
the  community's  reputation  generated  by  the  tax  disputes.  The 
vote  was  close,  but  the  name change carried  by  100  votes  out of 
6ooo.  The  referendum  was  significant  also  in  that  both  parties 
took  stands  on  a  controversial  issue,  the  Republicans  favoring 
the name change and the Democrats opposing it. 

It  would  appear,  then,  that  separate  constituencies  were  de-
veloping and the two parties were lining up as  they do on the na-
tional scene.  Middle class voters seeking to maintain the commu-
nity's  status  were  now  siding  with  the  Republicans,  joined  by 
some  cosmopolitans who had despaired of "reforming" the Dem-
ocrats.  Working  class  Catholics  and  less  affluent  white  collar 
workers  who,  pressed  financially,  either  could  no  longer  worry 
about status or were less concerned about what outsiders  thought 
of Levittown, were voting for Democrats.  In the  1965  election, a 
Republican candidate spoke of "the failure  to project a desirable 
image  of  the  community . . . .  Outsiders  sneer_  'Kookstown' 
when Willingboro is  mentioned." The Democrats attacked a  Re-
publican  plan  for  a  "million-dollar  municipal  complex"  when 
"hundreds of families are on the brink of economic survival," ar-
guing for belt-tightening on taxes instead. 

As  in prior years,  both parties continued to hope that industry 

•  116  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

could  be  attracted  into  the  township  to relieve  the  tax  burden, 
but  by  this  time,  neither  was  confident  that  it  would  happen. 
The  election  was  extremely  close,  the  voters  choosing  one  Re-
publican  and  one  Democrat,  with  only  25  votes  separating  the 
winning  and  losing  candidates.  The community  seemed  almost 
evenly divided  between  those  fearful  of lowered status and those 
fearful  of  higher  taxes,  but an  unexpected  event  or a  new  issue 
could change the political complexion at once,  reversing the for-
tunes  of  the  two  parties  or of  their  internal  factions  at  the  next 
election. 

THE ORIGIN OF MUNICIPAL SERVICES 

Before  the  Levittowners  came,  the  township  had  obtained  fire 
protection  and ambulance services  from  an adjacent community, 
and  its  residents  used  the  county  library.  Once  the  newcomers 
had  arrived,  the  Township  Committee  set  up  a  Police  Depart-
ment  and  a  Board  of  Health,  took  over  the  operation  of  the 
Levitt·built  water  and  sewage  treatment  plant,  and  regulated 
garbage removal  (which was  privately contracted),  but it was  too 
busy  to consider  other services.  These  were  left  to  the  initiative 
of  External  and  Internal  founders,  and  although  they  started 
like  voluntary  associations,  they  soon  requested  municipal  sub-
sidies  and  eventually  became  governmental  appendages.  Their 
founding  illustrates  the  close  relationship  between  organiza-
tional  and  political  party  politics  and  the  impact  of  class  on 
both. 

The Township Library and the Volunteer Fire Company 

After an abortive attempt by  the county librarian  to persuade 
the  builder  and  the  Township  Committee  to  start  a  library  in 
Levittown,  two  women,  needing  a  library  for  themselves  and 
their children,  proposed  its  establishment at a  Civic  Association 
meeting  in  September  1959·  Unskilled  at  the  finer  points  of 
organizing,  however,  they  soon  gave  way  to  a  lawyer  who  had 
been  forced  out  of  the  Republican  party  leadership  during  the 
hassle over liquor sales. Aided by the county librarian, he set up a 
Levittown  Library Association  later that month and,  in  Novem-
ber, persuaded the builder to donate a  three-acre site to celebrate 
the  community's  first  anniversary.  Then,  with  the  help  of 
women's clubs and  the  PT As,  the  Association  organized  a  book 

The  Emergence  of  Party  Politics 

•  117  • 

collection drive;  after Levittowners had contributed  2000  books, 
the  Township  Committee  provided  a  vacant  room  in  the  town-
ship building.  Because  most of the donated  books were old best-
sellers  and  book  club  selections,  discards  of  little  interest  to 
adults and not suitable for children,  the lawyer asked  the Town-
ship  Committee  for  municipal  funds  and,  having  engineered 
support  from  women's  clubs,  PT As,  and  service  clubs,  he  was 
able to get them. 

The two women had wanted only a  modest library, and one of 
them, who later became active in the Democratic party, was  fear-
ful  that  too  large  a  municipal  subsidy  would  result  in  a  tax 
increase or retard  the development of a  fire  company and a  hos-
pital. Although she said that "The first  thing I  look for  in a com-
munity is  my church and a  library," she qualified:  "As much as  I 
want a library, it is second to fire  protection and a hospital." Her 
attitude reflected  Democratic and  particularly working class  sen-
timent, which  held,  in the words of one Levittowner,  that "Body 
comes before mind." 

The  Republican  lawyer  and  his  colleagues  were  interested  in 
getting an  impressive library-and as  quickly  as  possible-to de-
velop a  community service  that would  bring them  political  sup-
port  and  perhaps  even  make  the  library  a  Republican  satellite. 
Most  of  their  initial  support  came  from  organizations  in  which 
Republicans were  especially  active,  and many  hoped  the  library 
could thus be a symbol of Republican strength and achievement. 
At that time,  the Veterans of Foreign Wars,  predominantly Dem-
ocratic, had organized a  volunteer fire  company and were asking 
for  public funds  to  build  the  company  and  a  firehouse.  Indeed, 
their plans were  so  far  advanced  that  they  had  just  asked  Levitt 
to give  the  site  originally  donated  for  a  library  to  the  fire  com-
pany. The founder of the library also wanted an impressive struc-
ture to provide the community with a  cultural and therefore un-
mistakably middle class  institution to compete with and counter-
act the fire company, which demonstrated working class strength. 
There was merit in establishing both a library and a fire company 
in Levittown, for using the county library and the fire  companies 
of  nearby  towns  was  inconvenient,  but questions  of  merit  were 
forgotten as  the two facilities  became symbols  in the struggle be-
tween  two classes over their ability to commandeer public funds, 
to  show  class  power,  and  to  determine  the  class  image  of  the 
community. 

•  118  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

The  Township  Committee  pared  the  initial  demand  for  li-
brary  funds  to $sooo,  sufficient  to  buy more  useful  and  respect-
able books and to hire a  part-time librarian. By  1g6o, almost  two 
thirds of the families held library cards (although  the main book 
borrowers  were  children)  and  there  was  enough  public  interest 
in the library to pass a referendum making it a municipal agency. 
There was not enough demand, however,  for a  building, and the 
library was  located first  in  the Town  Hall and later in  the main 
shopping center. 

The initial  competition between  the library and  the fire  com-
pany  had  developed  because,  after  the  Library  Association  was 
safely  established,  its  founder,  who  had  meanwhile  been  frus-
trated in his attempt to return to power in the Republican party, 
set  out to organize a  fire  company as  well.  He  first  proposed  the 
idea at a  Kiwanis  meeting,  suggesting  it become  a  club  project. 
This galvanized another  Kiwanis member,  the Democratic  party 
leader,  into action,  and before the  Kiwanis  could  meet again  to 
consider the matter he encouraged one of his precinct captains, a 
founder of the VFW,  to recruit sufficient members from  that or-
ganization  to form  the  company.  The  reasons  for  their  urgency 
and  their  success  are  not  hard  to  find.  The  Democratic  party 
leader wanted to bring the fire company into the Democratic fold 
both as community service advertising for  the party and as a  pos-
sible  future  source  of  patronage.  If the  firemen  were  predom-
inantly VFW members,  that  organization would  benefit  in  com-
munity stature and, perhaps, would also attract more veterans.  It 
was  essential,  therefore,  that  the  two  Democrats  beat  the  Re-
publican  lawyer  and  the  Kiwanis-also  predominantly  Republi-
can  in  outlook-to  the  punch.  The  service  club  unwittingly 
played  into  their  hands;  at  the  last  minute,  it  postponed  the 
meeting on the fire company for what it considered a more urgent 
issue. 

Proud of his working class origins and quite hostile toward the 
middle class elements of the community, the Democratic precinct 
captain  felt  that  the  fire  company provided  an  opportunity  for 
"working men"  to  do  their  part  for  the  community  and  to  ob-
tain  their share  of municipal  funds,  particularly since  the  town-
ship had just funded the library. He also knew how to sell  the fire 
company  to  his  VFW  members.  It would  enhance  local  pride, 
end  the  drain  of  Levittown  tax  monies  to  other  communities, 
and  reduce  fire  insurance  rates  for  the  homeowners.  Soon  it 

The  Emergence  of  Party  Politics 

•  ng  • 

would build a  firehouse  which would become a  social  center for 
working class men, particularly since the defeat of the liquor ref-
erendum had decreased  the attractiveness of the VFW clubhouse 
as a gathering place. 

The  VFW  leader  probably  knew  also  that  a  number  of  his 
members  craved  the  excitement  of  fire  fighting,  enjoyed  main-
taining  the  fire  truck,  and  above  all,  wanted  to  get  out  of  the 
house.  The  fire  company  would  give  them  a  proper  excuse. 
Finally, for  the leader himself there was,  aside from  the political 
triumph,  the chance  to upstage  the middle class  by showing that 
it depended on working class people for the protection of life and 
property.  He was  fond  of  telling  everyone  that  "schools  and  li-
braries  are  fine,  but  they  don't  put  out  the  fire  or  stop  the 
enemy."  (The  enemy was  the  Russians,  who  would  presumably 
be  stopped  by  Levittown's  civil  defense  program  which  he  had 
also just helped to organize.) 

Once  the  fire  company was  safely  organized,  the VFW  leader 
decided  that  fire  protection  was  too crucial  to  be left  to  laymen 
and looked for an expert. The Kiwanis club had contacted a resi-
dent  fire  insurance  underwriter,  but  when  their  meeting  was 
postponed,  the  VFW  approached  him,  promising  not  only  the 
top  job  but  enough  men  to  staff  a  company.  In  addition,  they 
told him  that some civil  defense money could legitimately be di-
verted  to  help  the  fire  company  get  started  and  the  Township 
Committee  was  willing  to  provide  municipal  funds  to  buy  the 
first  engine.  The Democrats'  choice was  not random;  the  under-
writer  had  been  one  of  the  first  active  Republicans  among  the 
Levittowners  and  was  then  being  wooed  by  the  Democratic 
party.  He was  also  of working class  origin  and,  whether  his  pur-
suers  knew  it  or  not,  felt  uncomfortable  in  Republican  and 
Kiwanis  circles.  After  he  took  over  the  fire  company,  he  joined 
the Democrats. 

Like  other  predominantly  working class  groups,  the  fire  com-
pany included some middle class people, in order to obtain polit-
ical  support  from  organizations  with  which  they  were  affiliated 
and to get legal and medical services.  Doctors vied for the unpaid 
position  of  medical  director,  for  it  offered  splendid  advertising 
among  a  working  class  population  they  could  not  easily  reach 
otherwise.  A  fire  company auxiliary was initiated by the wives of 
company  officers.  At  its  founding,  one  of  the  men  joked  about 
its  purpose:  "It's to  train  the  women  to  let  the  husbands out of 

•  120  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

the house  to fight  fires."  There was some  justification for  his  sar-
casm,  for  aside  from  community  service  and  a  chance  to  help 
their  husbands,  the  auxiliary  gave  the  wives  an  opportunity  to 
discourage  the  men  from  holding  stag  smokers  and  drinking 
parties. The company soon asked Levitt for a building site; a fire-
house  was  put  up  in  1961,  and  from  then  on,  many  members 
spent  a  great  deal  of  time  there,  most  of  it  polishing  the  fire 
engines.  Subsequently,  the  VFW  and  some  Democrats  helped 
start  an  Emergency  Ambulance  Squad  and  an  auxiliary,  again 
made  up  predominantly  of  working  class  residents.  But  with  a 
hospital  in  the community,  its  services  were  not  in  as  much  de-
mand, and  the squad never grew  large enough  to obtain its  own 
building, housing its ambulance in a gas station. 

Public  Recreation 

Class  conflict  also  pervaded  the  development of public recrea-
tion  in  Levittown,  but this conflict paled alongside  political and 
jurisdictional struggles between  the school  board and the Town-
ship Committee, which have so  far prevented the development of 
a  municipal  recreation  agency.  Levitt  had  located  playgrounds 
around the  elementary schools with  the  intention that  they,  like 
the  pools,  would  be  used  by  the  community after  school  hours. 
He  provided  no  money  to  develop  them,  however,  and  the 
schools,  beset  by  budget cuts,  never had  the funds,  so  they  have 
remained little more than baseball fields. 

Two months after the first  Levittowners arrived,  the newly ap-
pointed police chief appealed to the newcomers to set up a  Levit-
town  Youth  Sports  Association  (L.Y.S.A.)  to  forestall  the  juve-
nile  delinquency  he  expected  to  develop  the  next summer.  His 
appeal  turned  up  a  dozen  men,  some  previously  active  in  local 
juvenile  athletic  programs,  others  in  Little  Leagues.  Soon  they 
were  embroiled in a  bitter definitional struggle,  one  group seek-
ing strictly local  leagues in which everyone could play,  the other, 
eventual  affiliation  with  the  national  Little  League,  a  baseball 
progTam  modeled  on  the  major  leagues  which  favored  athlet-
ically  inclined  youngsters.  During the  first  year  the advocates  of 
local  programs,  most  of  them  middle  class  Protestants who  only 
wanted to enable their children  to  play softball, were in control, 
but  even  then  the  team  coaches  and  managers,  who  were  pre-
dominantly working class Catholics, favored  the heightened com-
petition of Little League ball.11  The latter also scheduled dances 

The  Emergence  of  Party  Politics 

•  121  • 

for  teenagers,  outvoting the middle class  men who did not share 
their  concern  with  keeping  the  youngsters  from  "getting  into 
trouble." 

After  the  first  year  of  baseball,  the  predominantly  working 
class  group ejected  the  middle  class  officers  and elected  as  presi-
dent  of  the  Sports  Association  a  professional  youth  worker  (a 
leader of  the  Catholic parish),  and other leading Catholics as  di-
rectors.  As  the second  year's  program was  getting underway,  the 
parish  priest  wanted  to  set  up  a  branch  of  the  Catholic  Youth 
Organization,  but  the  new  Catholic  officers  persuaded  him  to 
postpone  his  plans  in  order  to  prevent  a  mass  exodus  of adults 
and children from L.Y.S.A.  He was  eager to cooperate in order to 
avoid  religious  strife,  but  the  remaining  Protestants  were  not 
pacified and they became more dismayed as  the baseball program 
moved closer  to  the Little League model.  That winter,  their dis-
satisfaction and a small-scale rebellion by teenagers who resented 
the  Catholics'  close  supervision  over  them  at  L.Y.S.A.  dances 
sparked  the  mass  resignation  of  the  Catholic  officers;  they  were 
replaced  by a  new  group  of anti-Little  League  Protestants.  Even 
so,  an  ex-minor  league  ballplayer  now  took  over  the  baseball 
program and brought it yet closer to Little League standards,  al-
though he also made sure that less skillful youngsters would play. 
This in  turn  upset  the managers,  who,  wanting urgently to  win, 
began  to  question  the  decisions  of  the  umpires.  The officers  re-
buked the managers for poor sportsmanship and setting a bad ex-
ample for the children, and at the end of the season the managers 
forced  the  incumbents  out  of  office. 12  After  another  year  of 
skirmishing,  the  last  opponents  of  Little  League  were  gone  and 
L.Y.S.A.  affiliated itself with the national  Little  League.  In  1964, 
a  Willingboro  team  nearly won  a  world  championship. 

The youth  worker  who  had  been  elected  by  the  managers  in 
the winter of  1959  had  proposed  that  L.Y.S.A.  be  taken  over  by 
the municipality to solve its financial  problems and to become the 
spearhead  of  a  municipal  recreation  program  (which,  the  story 
went,  he  hoped  to  run).  Instead,  the  Township Committee  pro-
vided  L.Y.S.A.  with  a  small  subsidy  and  set  up  a  Recreation 
Study  Group  to  look  into  the  community's  overall  recreation 
needs.  After  his  election  to  the  school  board  as  part  of  the  so-
called  "Catholic  slate,"  he  urged  the  board  to  provide  more 
money for recreation, and when  this failed,  to  transfer all  recrea-
tion  functions  to  the  Township  Committee.  Some  board  mem-

•  122  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

hers  agreed,  for  with  the  oppos1uon  to  higher  school  budgets, 
recreation  would  always  receive  a  low  priority,  but  the  play-
grounds did belong to  the school system and  the first  superinten-
dent, an athletic enthusiast, would not surrender them. 

The Study  Group  met  for  almost  a  year,  but could  not  agree 
on  a  plan,  for  some  members  wanted  to  support  L.Y.S.A.,  some 
wanted  a  parks  program,  and  yet  others  viewed  recreation  only 
as a  means of delinquency prevention. Also  hampered by the  un-
willingness  of  the  school  board  to  let  anyone  plan  for  its  play-
grounds  and  by  the  builder's  reluctance  to  provide  alternative 
recreational  sites,  the  Study  Group disbanded  without  a  report. 
As  long as  the  Township  Committee  and  the  successor  Council 
were under Democratic control, however,  these bodies continued 
to  talk about municipal recreation,  and  in  1961,  paid for  bleach-
ers  in  the  high  school  stadium  and  for  uniforms  for  the  high 
school  band when  the school  board had to cut its  budget.  Aware 
of the  interest in recreation of working class  and  Catholic  Levit-
towners,  Democratic  politicans  also  became  boosters  of  the  var-
sity  teams  and  campaigned  for  municipal  support of  teenage  fa-
cilities.  For  a  variety  of  reasons,  however-to  be  described  in 
Chapter  Nine-no  such  program  has  yet  been  established,  al-
though  parks  are  planned  under  a  state  and  federally  funded 
"Green Acres" program. 

NOTES 

1.  This was  part of a county- and state-wide survey  then being made 
as  a  test  for  the  1960  Presidential  campaign  by  a  pro-Kennedy 
New  Jersey  Congressman. 

2.  This was  pure fantasy  on  their part, for  the resident doctors were 
already  looking forward  to  the  day  when  they  could  buy  $25,000 
houses Levitt was  proposing  to  build in a separate neighborhood. 
3·  Levittown,  Long Island  residents had also  tried  to  eliminate non-

resident  docton.  Orzack  and  Sanders,  p.  6. 

4·  This combination was a county tradition, for other townships had 
voted  to  remain  dry  in  earlier  years,  campaign  funds  being  sup-
plied  by  liquor  dealers  from  adjacent  wet  townships.  Five  years 
later,  the  earliest  election  at  which  the  question  could  be  raised 
again  in referendum,  Levittowners  voted  once  again  to  keep  the 
community dry. 

5·  Thirty  per  cent  concerned  internal  governmental  affairs;  45  per 
cent, citizen protection; and 16  per cent, the legitimation of build-

The  Emergence  of  Party  Politics 

•  123  • 

ing  programs,  either  Levitt's  or  those  of  other developers  con-
structing  small  shopping  centers  and  individual  stores  on  land 
not owned by Levitt. 

6.  Republicans  traditionally  favor  the  city  manager  because  he  is 
viewed as  using  business  techniques  to  run  the government.  Ban-
field  and  Wilson,  Chap.  13. 

7·  In state  and national  elections  the  Levittowners  voted  more con-

sistently,  usually going Democratic  by a  small  margin. 

8.  Ironically,  while  the  Republicans  were  publicly  attacking  the 
Democrats  for  bossism,  they were  privately searching for  a  leader 
to  unify  the  party. 

g.  There was also an Independent ticket, set up by a Republican who 
wanted to establish a following  that would force  the party to  take 
him in its inner circle. When he left to join  the "quality" Repub-
lican  group,  the  others,  most  of  them  professionals  and  liberals, 
filed  anyway  to  see  if they  could  attract  the  independent  vote. 
Their  platform,  a  municipal  equivalent  of  C.A.P.S.,  sought  to 
substitute planning for  partisan  politics  and patronage,  but their 
brand of upper middle class cosmopolitanism-they even opposed 
ward  organization-drew  less  than  10  per  cent  of  the  primary 
vote. 

10.  Earlier,  the accountant had  used his professional skill  to  uncover 
a  small  surplus in  the  school  budget,  enabling  the  Democrats  to 
demonstrate  the  qualifications  of  their  candidates  for  the  job  of 
tax reduction and allowing the  accountant to become  Mayor. 
11.  Paradoxically,  in  this instance, cosmopolitans favored  a  local  pro-
gram,  whereas  the  locals  wanted  a  national  one-partly  to  put 
Levittown,  then  still  without  high  school  varsity  athletics,  "on 
the map." 

12.  This conflict  is  endemic to  Little League,  and  many  professional 
recreationists  oppose it,  considering competition  harmful  to  chil-
dren.  Some  of  the  Levittown  managers  had  played  professional 
ball and  wanted badly  to  win,  but their desire  was  shared by  the 
children.  Although  they  could  have  been  restrained,  there  is  no 
evidence  that  the  children  were  hurt by the  competition,  except, 
of  course,  the  poorer  players  who  were  shunted  aside.  The  case 
against  the  Little  League  is  stated  in  Recreation  (1952);  a  study 
showing no harmful effects is reported in Recreation (1951), i-· 490· 

Chapter Seven 

THE  ORIGIN  OF 

A  COMMUNITY 

D 

D 

D 

D 

IN  OCTOBER  1961,  LEVITI'OWN  WAS  THREE  YEARS  OLD.  AS  OF  THAT 
July  4200  homes  had  been  built  and  occupied;  the  shopping 
center was  half  completed;  most  of  the  churches  were  either  in 
their buildings or about to move in;  new schools were still  going 
up and a  six-grade  parochial  school  was  in  operation.  Nearly  a 
hundred  organizations  were  functioning;  government  reorgani-
zation was about to take effect and a city manager was being hired. 
Levittown  had  become  a  community.  It  resembled  the  other 
Levittowns in its daily routine, its array of voluntary associations, 
and its politics, and it was probably typical  as  well.of many other 
settlements of young  middle-income families  who  had  chosen  to 
live outside  the city limits. 1 

In  becoming a  community,  Levittown  had  also  gone  through 
what seemed a  typical  origin  process.2  The residents  had  at  first 
associated almost  exclusively with  their neighbors,  but some  had 
then  sought  more  compatible  people  and .activities  outside  the 
block and had thereby set in motion the founding of community-
wide  groups.  These groups  were  started  by  founders  who  either 
came  to  Levittown  with  the  intent  of  setting  them  up  or were 
stimulated by outsiders,  or they began spontaneously  in reaction 
to momentary community and individual  needs.  Yet  even  when 
founders were individuals, they usually did not start groups with-
out  some  assurance  that  others  were  interested,  either  because 
they might be "in the same boat"-for example,  a  lonely  house-

• 

124 

• 

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  125  • 

wife-or  because  they  suspected  people  of  similar  interests  and 
backgrounds  were  available.  Until  such  people  were  found  the 
organization could not really begin  to  function.  Once  it had  be-
gun  to  function,  the  need  to  survive  in  the  midst  of competing 
organizations  with  the  same  need  required  numerical  strength 
(so  that  pre-existing membership  requirements  were  abrogated) 
and  haste  (so  that  officers  were  elected  quickly  and  activities 
gotten underway). 

Relaxation  of membership requirements and speed of organi-
zation were sure to generate definitional struggles over the future 
of  the  organization.  The  manifest  struggles  were  usually  about 
the  content  of  the  organizational  program  and  the  speed  of 
growth. Those advocating a specific program usually favored slow 
growth;  those  less  dedicated  to  a  program  and  more  concerned 
with  organizational  survival  (and  victory  in  the  interorganiza-
tion  competition)  demanded  rapid  growth.  The  advocates  of 
rapid growth generally won out in the voluntary associations and 
the churches, whereas  in the public agencies-particularly in the 
school system and the government-the victory went to  the advo~ 
cates of slow growth. In this instance, their victory did not signify 
public support of governmental programs,  however,  but reflected 
the  demand  of  the  "members"  for  minimal  expenditures  (and 
taxes).  That  victory  also  signified  the  absence  of  competing 
groups  in  the  public  sphere,  which  eliminated  the  most  urgent 
organizational incentive for speed. 

At a more latent level, organizational struggles were reflections 
of class  differences,  intertwined with religious ones and the ever 
present  split  between  the  locals  and  the  cosmopolitans.  In  the 
voluntary  associations,  the  proponents  of  rapid  growth  were 
usually lower middle class people who sought to put their organi-
zations  on  the  map  in  the  community;  the  advocates  of  slow 
growth  were  often  upper  middle  class  cosmopolitans,  less  con-
cerned with organizational status than with substantive program-
matic goals.  In  the  public agencies,  the  positions  were  reversed; 
the  cosmopolitans  wanted  rapid  growth  so  that  these  agencies 
would  get  to  the  programs  they  demanded.  The  majority  of 
locals favored slow growth, except for athletic and other activities 
which  would  aid  Levittown  in  the  county's  intercommunity 
competition. 

The  cross-cutting  of  class  and  cosmopolitan-local  considera-
tions is  illustrated by the behavior of two township officials,  both 

•  126  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

also  active  in  the  Jewish  community,  who  took  diametrically 
different  positions  in  their  synagogue  and  municipal  roles.  One 
was  an  upper  middle  class  professional  and,  as  president  of  the 
school  board,  he  urged  rapid  expansion  of  the  curriculum  and 
guidance programs to benefit bright children;  whereas the other, 
a  lower  middle  class  manager  and  then  Mayor  of  Levittown, 
feared further tax increases and UJ"ged  minimal expansion. In the 
Conservative  synagogue,  their  positions  were  reversed.  The  pro-
fessional  wanted  a  coqgregation  dedicated  to  Jewish  education; 
the  manager  wanted  a  rapidly  growing  congregation  with  a 
building and a  full-time rabbi. The professional, a cosmopolitan, 
saw  both institutions  in terms of  program;  the manager,  a  local, 
was  most  concerned  with  assuring  their  survival.  The  govern-
ment and  the  school  would  survive  regardless  of  financial  prob-
lems,  but the  synagogue  might not,  and so  the  manager  favored 
low  taxes  in the  former,  but deficit  financing  for  the  latter.  The 
two men also split on who should make the decisions;  the cosmo-
politan  argued  that  a  qualified  professional  should  guide  both 
school  and synagogue;  the local  believed that these  should be re-
sponsive  to  their  constituents,  a  majority  of  whom  favored  his 
own  priorities. 

The definitional  struggles,  when added  to  interorganizational 
competition, produced considerable insecurity, which in turn led 
to  the  speedy  rejection  of  dissidents.  The  first  to  be  extruded 
were  individuals whose  backgrounds differed  sharply  from  those 
of  the  majority,  "loners"  who  did  not  get  along with  their  col-
leagues, and "idealists," people with unusual but acceptable ideas 
that were  too  expensive.  The bitterest  hostility was  reserved  for 
"radicals,"  people with  unusual  and  unacceptable  ideas  who  re-
fused  to compromise.3  The term did not refer to political views, 
and  in  the commonsense  usage  of  the  word,  Levittown  had  few 
radicals (none of the left and only a  handful of the right).  It was, 
rather,  a  relative  term,  applied  to  powerless  dissidents.  One 
Levittowner,  who  was  forced  to  leave  several  organizations dur-
ing  his  first  year  because  of  his  unwillingness  to  compromise, 
soon  acquired a  reputation as  a  man "with axes  to  grind"  and a 
"radical." When he ran  for  the school  board as  a  member of the 
Catholic slate, however, he had support for his point of view, and 
though  as  irascible  and  uncompromising as  ever,  was  no longer 
described  as  a  radical.  Once  anger  over  the  school  budget  had 
died down,  his brief popularity ended, and when he had difficul-

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  127  • 

ties in working with his fellow  board members, he resigned. Soon 
afterward he left Levittown. 

In  many  organizations,  people  of  higher  or  lower  status  than 
the majority of members were also extruded eventually, although 
more  gradually  and  less  acrimoniously  than  radicals.  For  ex· 
ample, an  upper middle class  program chairman in a  lower mid-
dle class  group  learned  quickly  that  her  "educational"  aims  for 
the organization were not welcome.  As  she described it, "There's 
been criticism that the programming is  too high, that there aren't 
enough laughs.  I  think the girls want a  lecture from a  beautician 
or a  program about hats,  but this is a waste of time for me.  .  .  . I 
have  invited  the  Anti-Defamation  League  for  next  month's  pro-
gram.  That  should  generate  some  criticism,  but  I  don't  care." 
Actually, she was  never criticized openly,  but the group picked a 
culturally more congruent program chairman the following year. 
The  most  systematic  extrusion,  though  not  planned,  was  of  the 
cosmopolitans, who soon  found  themselves in a  minority in most 
of  the  organizations  they  entered  and  in  constant  conflict  with 
the  local  orientation  of  their  leaders.  Eventually,  they  resigned 
from  the  groups  in  which  they  had  been  active,  limiting  them-
selves  to  organizations  with  cosmopolitan  aims  or surfacing spo-
radically to head protest movements against particular school and 
township policies! 

As  organizations  matured,  conflicts  over  the  speed  of  growth 
became  irrelevant,  and  after  losers  in  the  definitional  struggle 
had left or had given up the fight,  the groups achieved a  measure 
of  stability.  Major  organizational  crises  "were  replaced  by  the 
everyday  mixture  of  cooperation  and  petty  conflict  that  marks 
any organization;  membership size  became constant;  attendance, 
habitual;  and  programs,  routine.  There  was  still  a  constant 
search for  "ideas" that would attract new members or bring back 
laggard  ones,  and  occasionally  new  activities  were  started  or  or-
ganizational  revivals  held  for  this  purpose.  The continuing de-
velopment  of  new  neighborhoods  always  provided  additional 
members  and  an  occasional  new  leader,  although,  as  I  noted 
earlier,  the  later  arrivals  tended  to  prefer  their  own  organiza-
tions.  Even  so,  most  of  the  organizations  now  functioning  in 
Levittown were founded during the first  two or three years;  later, 
new  ones  came  slowly.  External  founders  were  no  longer  inter-
ested,  and  besides,  almost  all  the  national  groups  that  might 
appeal  to  people  like  the  Levittowners  were already  present.  In 

•  128  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

addition, I  suspect, the later arrivals had less need for new organ· 
izations,  for  the sorting function  could be  taken care of by exist· 
ing ones and moving into an established community is  not quite 
the  same  as  moving  into a  brand  new  one.  The pioneering  im-
pulse to  participate in a  new group simply because such a  group 
was needed to make Levittown into a community had died out-
it was  never very  strong  even  among  the  first  arrivals--and  the 
later  purchasers  probably  even  more  than  the  first  came  for  the 
house rather  than for  the community. 5  They were  no longer "in 
the same  boat,"  for  the original  boat  that had arrived  in the un-
known  and  possibly  hostile  seas  of  Burlington  County  had  be-
come firmly anchored. 

The  process  of  community  origin  I  have  described  fits  most 
closely  that  of  the  voluntary  associations  and  the  churches. 
Properly speaking, neither the school  system nor the government 
was  founded  anew  in  Levittown;  they  were  taken  over  from  the 
old residents and altered.  Of course,  the school system-as distin-
guished  from  the  school  board-was  new,  and  it  went  through 
the  same definitional  struggles  as  a  voluntary  organization.  The 
superintendent-founder  had  to  bend  his  ideas  to  residents  who 
had  different  conceptions  of  the  school,  but  ultimately  was  re-
placed-like many an  organizational  founder-because  he could 
not get along with his "members" and was  unable to achieve  the 
gTowth  speed  those  in  power wanted  from  him.  Also,  the  school 
and  the  municipal  government were,  like voluntary associations, 
involved  in  a  daily  routine  from  which  they  could  not  diverge 
significantly, so  that they too described a  path from origin (or re· 
birth) through definitional struggle to uneasy stability. 

Their political arms could not follow such a path, however;  in-
deed, it is difficult to talk of an origin process in politics at all, for 
political  institutions  must  always  respond  to  changing  commu· 
nity conditions, sometimes almost at a moment's notice, and have 
little opportunity to build stable organizations. School politicians 
could  protect  themselves  somewhat  against  constant  ups  and 
downs,  for  the school  was  endowed with  enough civic sacredness 
to be "above politics." The political  parties could not so  protect 
them~elves, however,  and  had  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  commu-
nity-formation  conflicts.  Unlike  voluntary  associations  or  even 
the  schools,  which  extracted  some  loyalty  from  the  parents,  the 
political  parties had no loyal  members to speak of,  for  the party 
workers gave  their allegiance  more to victorious candidates  than 

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  129  • 

to  the  party and  too  few  voters  considered  themselves  partisans. 
They  shifted  their  votes  to  whatever  party-or  more  often,  to 
whatever candidate-promised to meet  their current needs.  The 
parties could not easily adapt to this flux,  however, for being con-
nected to county, state,  and national  bodies,  they also  had to  pay 
attention  to  outside  requirements.  In  most  suburbs,  the  Demo-
crats  represent  working  class  and  ethnic  populations;  the  Re-
publicans,  the  middle  class  and  Protestant  ones.  In  Levittown, 
however, both had to appeal to the lower middle class  in order to 
have  a  chance  of  victory,  and  this  group  included  not  only  the 
independents  but also  a  large  number of mobile  Catholics,  once 
Democrats,  who  were  now  quite  undecided  as  to  which  party 
would best meet  their needs.  As  a  result,  both parties  had  to  de-
velop flexible  local  programs and images without totally surrend-
ering  their county and  national  programs,  and  this  ambivalence 
added to the constant factional  battles. 

Th~ parties' problems were compounded by the Levittowners' 
distrust  of  politics  and  politicians.  Among  ex-city  dwellers,  the 
distrust  had  been  learned  in  childhood,  but  became  stronger 
when  they were able,  for  the first  time,  to see  politicians and the 
political  process  up close.  Levittowners  from  other  suburbs  had 
perhaps become accustomed  to  this view,  but their suspicion was 
also  heightened  at first  by  the  failure  of  the  old  residents  to  re-
spond to their new constituents. As  a result,  when Levittown was 
less  than  a  year  old  many  people  believed  that  the  community 
was  run by a  corrupt political  clique which  would be difficult  to 
remove. Later events disproved this assessment,  of course,  but the 
distrust  was  transferred  to Levittowners who  became  politicians, 
particularly  because  of  the  ambivalence  the  voters  imposed  on 
them. The politicians were  also  confronted  with  insoluble  prob-
lems  for  which,  like  American  politicians  everywhere,  they  had 
to  promise solutions during election  campaigns.  Without  an  in-
dustrial tax base,  Levittown was  condemned to  ever  rising taxes, 
and  many  voters  were  sophisticated  enough  to  know  that  the 
candidates' best intentions,  their earnest campaign promises, and 
even  their  energetic  efforts  once  in  office  could  not  really  snip 
more  than  a  few  dollars  off  either school  or  municipal  budgets. 
This increased  the voters'  distrust and  heightened  their demand 
for  someone  above  politics,  a  city  manager  or  a  politician  who 
sought  to  be  nonpartisan.  Nonpartisanship  was  not  enough, 
however,  for  the  voters  rejected  the  upper  middle  class  Inde-

•  130  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

pendent  slate  which  ran  on  an  antipolitical  platform  in  1gth. 
They  wanted  nonpartisans  of  their  own  class,  who  reflected 
their desire to limit the expansion bf municipal services. 

In  the  end,  they  resigned  themselves  to  the  continued  exis-
tence  of  party  politics;  and,  being  neither  cosmopolitan  nor 
upper  middle  class,  they  were  even  willing  to  live  with  a  party 
boss  (at least  in  the Democratic  party)  provided  he  continued  to 
press  for  lower  taxes  and  remained  in  the  background,  perhaps 
only to serve as a convenient scapegoat if and when another polit-
ical  crisis  arose. 8  Of course,  they  could  always  point  to  the  city 
manager  and  the  school  superintendent  as  professionals  who 
would  provide  nonpolitical  services,  but  in  the  last  analysis  the 
Levittowners settled for  party politics because what they  wanted 
from the political process was ultimately more important to them 
than who would oversee  it. 

Individual associations, churches, and even political parties did 
not  function  in  isolation,  and  though  they  competed  against 
each  other  for  members,  they  were  also  thrown  together  for 
common  tasks.  These  tasks  and  the  shortage  of leaders  had  pro-
duced  the  interlocking  directorates,  temporary  alliances,  and 
political  ties I  described among voluntary associations in Chapter 
Three;  and the cooperative ventures among ministers,  as  well  as 
their coopting of secular leaders and their activities in school and 
government affairs  I described in Chapter Four.  Intergroup com-
petition was  too  strong in  the  first  years  to provide much  incen-
tive for joint ventures, but one could predict that, eventually, the 
entire  array  of  formal  organizations  and  institutions  would  be-
come  a  structure  of sorts,  an  uneasy  network  of  occasional  rela-
tionships  and  a  few  more  permanent  alliances  that  would  bind 
some  of  them  together  against  each  other  in  coalitions  of  like-
minded  people  and,  perhaps,  bring  many  of  them  together  if 
Levittown faced a threat from an outside enemy. 

Although  the voluntary  associations  and churches were  osten-
sibly nonpolitical, they could not really stay out of politics, Since 
the primary issues debated  in the community-taxes, status,  and 
schools--involved  almost  everyone  and  were  often  more  impor-
tant  than  the  organizational  agenda,  few  of  the  organizational 
leaders could  avoid  taking  sides  on  them-although,  of  course, 
they never did so  officially.  As  early as  1960,  when  a  civic  group 
was  holding  a  candidate's  night  for  school  board  hopefuls,  it 
could  not  find  a  single  community  leader,  in  either  secular  as-

The  Origin  of  a  Community 
sociations or  churches,  who could  be considered  neutral  on  the 
issues  then facing the schools.  Ultimately,  it had  to invite some-
one from  outside the community to chair the meeting. 

•  131  • 

THE EVOLUTION OF CLASS AND POWER STRUCTURES 

The  youthfulness  of  the  community  also  affected  the  develop-
ment of class and power structures, although they were shaped by 
distinctive qualities of Levittown as  welL  Despite the overriding 
importance of class in the origins and the definitional struggles of 
the  community's  groups,  no  clearly  visible  class  structure  had 
evolved in the first  three years of Levittown's existence. National 
distinctions and judgments regarding class and prestige pervaded 
its everyday life, of course, and the organizations sorted residents 
by  their  socioeconomic  level.  Even  so,  traditional  class  distinc-
tions  had  to  be  altered  somewhat.  People  did  not  know  each 
other  well  enough  to  have  information  about  their  parentage, 
and those who came for upward social  mobility carefully avoided 
reference  to  their  past histories.  Without knowledge  about  peo-
ple's income, with  the absence of very  poor and very rich neigh-
bors,  and  with  the  ever  present  fact  that  everyone  lived  in 
virtually the same house, it was difficult  to base judgments on in-
come.  People  in  the  $u,ooo houses  might  be  less  well  off  than 
those  in  the  $14,ooo  houses,  but  no  one  could  be  sure,  partic-
ularly  since  the  cheapest  house,  at  first  the  only  one  with  four 
bedrooms,  could  have  been  chosen  on  the  basis  of  family  size. 7 
Needless to say,  people who had part-time maids or two  new cars 
were suspected of greater affluence,  but they were  also  criticized 
for "showing off" or "trying to keep up with the Joneses," and on 
the  block,  their  status  was  lower  than  that  of  the  less  affluent 
neighbor trying hard to make ends meet. 

Occupation and education were  more reliable  indices of class 
position,  and  the  professional  received  more  deference  than  the 
factory worker, but many people had obtained some college  edu-
cation  and  the  majority  were  white  collar  workers.  Also,  many 
were working in new and unfamiliar technical jobs, for example, 
as  computer  programmers,  whose  status  could  not  easily  be 
judged by traditional indices. There were also new and obfuscat-
ing labels for  old  jobs,  and  not many people  could guess  that a 
"supply specialist"  was  really only a  high-grade  stock  clerk,  par-
ticularly  if  he  worked  for  a  large  and  well-known  corporation. 

•  132  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Finally, and  perhaps most  important,  the  intense  need  for  com-
munity leaders and organizational  participants in the early years 
temporarily  set  aside  traditional  class  distinctions  and  allowed 
people  of  low  status  to  become  prestigious  community  figures. 8 
Once  the  need  for  the  services  of  leaders  had  decreased,  people 
were  more  ready  to  notice  that  they  lacked  the  education,  job, 
speech  habits,  and  other refinements  that went with  high  status. 
Then,  more  typical  class  judgments could be  made  about  them. 
Eventually,  when  the  supply  of  leaders  with  sufficient  status 
catches  up  to  the  demand,  national  class  distinctions  will  prob-
ably  become  more  important  in  Levittown,  and  churches  and 
associations  may  be  ranked  by  the  same  criteria  that  obtain  in 
other  American  communities.  This  process  might  have  been 
hastened  if  Levitt  had  been  able  to  build  the  $2o,ooo-$25,ooo 
houses  he  had  intended,  but  because  of  Levittown's  image  as  a 
low-status  community,  sales  were  slow  and  construction  was 
halted after So  such houses had been sold. 9 

One likely deviation  from  the  standard class  hierarchy was al-
ready apparent.  In  many suburbs  the  professional  upper middle 
class  is,  by  virtue  of  its  income,  education,  and  occupation,  the 
highest-ranking group,  but  this  is  not  likely  to  happen  in  Levit-
town.  For  one  thing,  the  professionals  are a  small  minority,  and 
many  are  Jewish.  Although  there  is  almost  no  overt  or  even 
covert  anti-Semitism  in  Levittown,  a  predominantly  Protestant 
and Catholic  town  in a  predominantly  Protestant county  is  not 
likely to award highest status to a Jewish group. More important, 
the professional group has generally taken  unpopular stands, and 
many of  its  members are known to be in  Levittown  only  tempo-
rarily and will,  like other Mobiles,  eventually depart for  higher-
priced  suburbs.  This  group  is,  therefore,  a  deviant  minority.  If 
any single  population is  likely to have the  highest prestige in the 
community in the future,  it is  the managerial upper middle class, 
whose  political  stance  is  more locally oriented and whose  way  of 
life  is  more  in  line  with  what  most  Levittowners  would  like  to 
achieve. 

The class structure most likely to develop in Levittown is what 
might  be called  a  multinucleated one,  consisting of fairly  separ-
ate  working  class,  lower  middle  class,  and  upper  middle  class 
sectors,  each  of which will  consider itself  to be of most  worth,  if 
perhaps  not  of  highest  status,  in  the  community,  and  each  of 
which will award top prestige to its own organizational, political, 

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  188  • 

and  social  leaders.  In  a  bedroom  community,  in  which  few 
people are  economically dependent on  fellow  residents,  there  is 
less  need  to feel  inferior  to neighbors of higher income and edu-
cation,  particularly if one's own  group  is  politically and symbol-
ically stronger in the community by sheer weight of numbers.  Of 
course,  working class  people  know  that  they  have  less  education 
and  income  than  professionals  and  will  express  hostility  toward 
the  community  activities  of  the  latter,  but  as  long  as  they  can 
outvote  them,  class  difference  is  less  likely to be felt  as  status in-
feriority.  If changes  in  the  national  or  metropolitan  economy 
hurt the working class  and  leave  its  more  affluent  neighbors  un-
touched,  however,  feelings  of  status  inferiority  will  surely  de-
velop,  accompanied  by  demands  for  retribution  through  local 
political actions. 

The multinucleated structure may also  become  subdivided by 
religion,  separating  a  fundamentalist  Protestant  working  class 
segment  from  the  Catholic  one,  and  creating  Protestant,  Catho-
lic,  and  Jewish  segments  in  each  of  the  other  classes.  Religious 
segregation and conflict have  been present in Levittown from the 
start,  but these  had nothing to do with doctrinal or even denom-
inational  differences  and  often  represented  class  variations  that 
correlate  with  religion.  Some  were  gross  variations:  Catholics, 
particularly  the  less  affluent working class  ones,  who  had  to  sup-
port  both  public  and  parochial  schools,  were  obviously  against 
higher taxes.  Some differences were more subtle, as  when restric-
tive  lower  middle  class  people  in  conservative  Protestant  de-
nominations  objected  to  the  sale  of  liquor  and  the  holding  of 
bingo games, which were favored by expansive lower middle class 
residents  and  Catholics;  or  when  liberal  upper  middle  class 
Levittowners,  mostly  Jewish,  were  more  enthusiastic  over  the 
teaching  of  foreign  languages  in  elementary  schools  than  the 
largely  Protestant  managerial  upper  middle  class  or,  for  that 
matter,  than  lower  middle  class  Jews  who  had  fewer  academic 
ambitions  for  their  children.  The  correlation  between  religion 
and class  also  complicated  the alignment of the  political  parties. 
The Democrats  traditionally  favor  patronage  and  the  rapid  ex-
pansion  of  municipal  services  which  appeal  to  working  class 
voters,  but  in  Levittown,  this  conflicted  with  the  need  of  their 
Catholic  working class  constituents  to  keep  taxes  minimal.  The 
Republicans, traditionally  the  party  of low  taxes,  were  more  in-
clined  to defend  public school  budgets for  their  Protestant con-

• 

184  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

stituents, particularly in a community in which Catholics were in 
a  plurality, and thus the party had to support higher school taxes. 
Since school  elections were nonpartisan,  these conflicts never  be-
came  visible,  but  they  complicated  internal  party  definitional 
struggles.  For a  time,  the  Republicans  advocated  lower munici-
pal  taxes  while  keeping quiet about  the  school  budget,  whereas 
the Democrats supported lower taxes across the board, but always 
suggested the need to expand municipal services as well. 

In a  community without sources  of employment,  the political 
power of residents is a major determinant of their position in the 
local class hierarchy, and Levittown's power structure may, there-
fore,  coincide even more than elsewhere with  the class structure. 
So  far,  political  fortunes  have  shifted  too  often  from  election  to 
election to suggest which group,  if any,  will  eventually have  the 
most  power.  Moreover,  until  now,  the  most  powerful  bloc  has 
been the  Levitt  organization.  As  the  largest single  landowner  in 
the township,  its contribution to the tax rolls, the influence of its 
building program  on  the  future  of  the community,  and  its  very 
real  interest  in  the  activities  of  the  municipal  government  in 
connection with its building program have made it the most per-
sistent  petitioner  for  action  by  the  government,  and  an  ever 
present interest group whose wishes need to be considered. As  the 
building program comes  to an end,  the  builder's involvement in 
the community and  his  power  will  decrease  and  perhaps  disap-
pear  entirely,  but  given  the  constant  arrival  of  new  purchas~s 
and  the  high  proportion  of  Transients  and  Mobiles  in  the 
present population, it is  too early to tell  which  population group 
will  ultimately  be  most  numerous  and  thus  most  influential. 

As  yet,  no  definable  and  stable  voter  blocs  have  emerged  in 
Levittown,  except  perhaps  a  Catholic  bloc  which  has  solidified 
around the issue of school  taxes.  Although politicians have some-
times  acted  (particularly  when  they  slated  candidates  for  town-
ship office)  as  if  there were other religious blocs,  blocs of earlier 
and  later arrivals,  and  "working men,"  white collar,  and  profes-
sional  blocs  as  well,  these  assumed  blocs  have  rarely  voted  as 
such.10  Nor  has  a  stable  set  of  leaders  developed  around  spe-
cific  issues,  because  of  the  turnover  of  office  holders,  and  be-
cause  most  issues  generate  somewhat  distinctive  constituencies 
and  decision-makers.  There have  been alliances  among Catholic 
and  less  affluent  non-Catholic  Levittowners,  and  anti-Levitt  co-
alitions  have developed among low-status and cosmopolitan resi-

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  135  • 

dents,  but  these  have  not  yet  become  stable  enough  to  become 
solid  interest  groups.  Consequently,  it  is  probably  premature  to 
identify a  power structure in  Levittown.  For the  time being,  the 
builder's  influence,  the  existence  of  the  Catholic  bloc,  and  the 
Democratic  party  leader's  ability  to  retain  his  hold on  the  party 
have  generated  a  somewhat  more  monolithic  local  power  struc-
ture,  less  varied  from  ·issue  to  issue  than  in  most  American 
communities. 

Since  the  people  who  described  themselves  as  Settlers  are  the 
only  ones  who  can  be  expected  to  remain  in  Levittown  in  the 
years to come, and may develop a  more stable voting pattern over 
time,  they  are  likely  to  be  the  most  influential  group  in  the 
future.  Because Settlers include an undue proportion of working 
class  and  less  affluent  lower middle class  people,  who are  for  the 
most part Catholics as  well,  a  Catholic bloc may well  become the 
single most  powerful  group  in  the community.  Since  it contains 
many of the least affluent residents who are particularly sensitive 
to status decrease  inside the community and are most  threatened 
by downward mobility,  it may also  become the most vocal  politi-
cal  constituency.  The  balance  of power  will  probably always  be 
held by the non-Catholic lower middle class, but because its party 
loyalty  is  weaker  and  because  it  includes  both  Transients  and 
Settlers, it may not be as  politically cohesive as  the  Catholic pop-
ulation. The absence of industry,  the relatively small  number of 
store  owners,  and  the  endemic  conflict  of  interest  between  the 
various shopping centers are likely to mean that businessmen will 
be  less  influential  than  they  are  in  other communities,  and  that 
on issues affecting them as well as  residents,  the latter will always 
win out.  On issues  that concern  the businessmen alone,  however, 
their ability to organize and to provide campaign funds will  pro-
vide them with sufficient power to achieve their ends. 

CRUCIAL  DECISIONS  AND  FACTORS  IN THE  ORIGIN  OF 
THE  COMMUNITY 

Of all the decisions and factors that made a community out of the 
strangers who purchased Levitt houses,  the most important were, 
of course,  the builder's.  His decision  to  build another Levittown 
near Philadelphia, with houses in a  $12,ooo-$I5,ooo price range, 
determined  the  age,  class,  and  religious  characteristics  of  the 
population, and these in turn influenced-perhaps determined-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

the  informal  and  formal  groups  and  institutions  that  developed 
in  the  community.  Had  he  decided  to  build  more  expensive 
houses,  a  different  kind  of  community  would  have  resulted.  Of 
course,  his  decision  was  not  made  in a  vacuum;  it  was  based  on 
th~ firm's  previous success  in  building for  young middle-income 
people  and  its  belief  that  there  were  enough  of  them  in  the 
Philadelphia area to justify another Levittown. The specific loca-
tion  of  the  community  outside  what  was  then  Philadelphia's 
commuting area at  first  attracted  fewer  Philadelphians  than had 
been  expected,  resulting  perhaps  in  a  smaller  Catholic  popula-
tion,  and  its  proximity  to  an  Air  Force  base  and  the  research 
laboratories  near  Camden  brought  in  more  Transients.  On  the 
whole,  however,  the  population  that came  to  Levittown  was  not 
much different from  those  in the earlier Levittowns. 

A  second  important decision was  to buy enough land  to build 
u,ooo homes  and  to  announce  this  publicly,  which  in  turn  de-
cided a significant  number of External agencies  to start churches 
and  voluntary  associations.  This  resulted  in  the  immediate 
founding  of  many  groups,  speeded  up  their  formation,  and  re-
duced false  starts and mistakes,  thus assuring their survival  more 
quickly  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case.  It may  also 
have increased the number of national branches in the new com-
munity. 

Another  significant  Levitt  decision  was  to  concentrate  on  the 
building and  marketing  of  houses  and  to  leave  the  planning of 
local  institutions and facilities  to the residents.  This enabled  the 
old  residents  to  build county values  into  Levittown's school  sys-
tem,  government,  and  party  politics;  integrated  Levittown  into 
the  county  social  structure  more  quickly  than  would  otherwise 
have been the case;  led directly  to  the early definitional  struggles 
between  the  old  residents  and  the  newcomers,  but  also  encour-
aged  alliances  against  the  common  cosmopolitan  foe;  and  of 
course,  limited  possible  sources  of  resident  hostility  toward  the 
builder. 

A  fourth,  perhaps  more  important,  decision  was  to  subsidize 
the  operating  expenditures  of  the  schools,  which  artificially  re-
duced the tax rate for several  years and thus enabled less  affluent 
Levittowners  to  buy.  When  the  Levitt  subsidy  was  withdrawn, 
these  less  affluent  homeowners  were  among  the  most  insistent 
supporters  of  the  tax-reduction  forces  that  played  such  a  deter-
mining influence in Levittown politics. 

A fifth  decision,  to mix house types on the block, undoubtedly 

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  137  • 

affected  the  organizational  and  political  life  of  the  new commu-
nity.  If each  neighborhood  had  consisted  of a  single  house  type, 
three  different  types  of  neighborhoods  would  have  developed, 
each  with  slightly  different  social  and  political  interests.  For ex-
ample, a  neighborhood of three-bedroom  houses would have con-
centrated  childless  and  older  couples,  least  interested  in  school 
matters,  and  might  have  encouraged  more  organized  protest 
against  school  budgets.  More  neighborhood-based  voluntary  as-
sociations would have been formed and party politics might have 
been  more  organized  on  the  neighborhood  level,  with  conflicts 
developing between  groups of similar  ones. 

Of course, other builder (and  township)  decisions played some 
role  in  the  development  of  the  community,  but  none  were  as 
material.  Indeed,  most  developmental  processes  were  predict-
able  and  almost  inevitable  consequences  of  the  very  establish-
ment of a  new community.  For example,  the  inrush  of External 
agencies  could have  been predicted after  Levitt's announcement 
that  he  would  build  u,ooo  houses,  for  national  associations 
everywhere are expanding their membership rolls.  Limited social 
choices  on  the  block  inevitably  created  a  need  for  community 
sorting  organizations,  and  one  could  have  expected  that  minor-
ities  and  the  lonely  would  be  the  first  to  start  them.  Similarly, 
once organizations had been started,  their need to survive amidst 
competition  could  only  lead  to  the  hurried  selection  of  officers, 
the  relaxation  of  membership  requirements,  definitional  strug-
gles,  and the arrival  of  similar organizations which could not lag 
behind  in  the  competition  for  members  and  leaders.  It  is  not 
surprising,  therefore,  that  most  of  the  associations  and  churches 
now  in  the community were organized during the  first  couple of 
years,  drawing on  the initial  purchasers  to man  them and award-
ing  them  positions  of  power  and  status  that  they  held  on  to  in 
later  years.  The  end  result  may  have  looked  like  the  much  dis-
cussed  suburban  hyperactivity,  but  it  was  hyperactivity  on  the 
part of  organizations  rather  than  on  the  part of  residents.  Prop-
erly speaking, it was  not hyperactivity at all, but simply the rapid 
development of organizational  structures  in order  to  assure  their 
survival. 

Pre-Occupancy  Aspirations  and  Community  Origin 

One of my initial hypotheses,  that the origin of the community 
and the formation  of particular groups and institutions would re-
flect  the  aspirations  Levittowners  expressed  before  arrival,  was 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

clearly not supported by what actually happened.  Only a  few res-
idents  aspired  to  community  activities  before  they  came,  and 
Levittown's  organizations  were  started  instead  by  whatever  Ex-
ternal  agencies  were  interested  in  the  new  community  and  by 
residents  who  had  personal  loyalties  to  a  specific  group.  This 
would suggest  that  the aspirations and wishes  of the mass  of resi-
dents are irrelevaut, and that a new community can be organized 
by  individuals  and  even  nonresidents  who  are  determined  to 
realize  their  own  preferences,  provided  only  that  they  have 
enough  organizational  know-how  and  persistence  to  put  them 
over to the population. 

It  is  true  that  almost  anyone  could  start  an  organization  in 
Levittown,  but  it  is  also  true,  and  in  the  long run  more  impor-
tant,  that  the  organization's  survival  could  only  be  assured  by 
adapting it to the needs and· wishes of its members, so  that Levit-
towners could  determine  the  fate  of organizations  by  transform-
ing  what  was  started  for  them  to  their  own  preferences.  This 
transformation  process  began  even  before  Levittowners  moved 
into  their houses,  for  the  builder acted  in  their  behalf  by  using 
experience  collected  in  previous  Levittowns  to  design  the  com-
munity and  to  select  the  churches  to  which  he  would  give  free 
land.  The  churches  themselves  used  data  from  these  earlier 
Levittowns  to  determine  which  denominations  would  attract 
enough members to make  it worthwhile  to  build, and  they were 
careful  to  select  "starters"  who,  wanting  to  work  in  Levittown, 
would be responsive to their future congregants. 

The  national  associations  which  were  founded  Externally  al-
ways  began  by  finding  a  Levittowner  who  would  do  the  actual 
organizing, and limited  their role to getting the group safely  un-
der way.  They left  the  local  leaders  free  to  determine  member-
ship  qualifications  and  programs,  which  in  turn  enabled  these 
leaders to adapt themselves to the needs of people who wanted an 
organization without having to follow  the official  purposes of the 
group.  Usually,  the  process  was  almost  automatic,  for  g~ven the 
shortage of active  participants, any resident who proposed a  pro-
gram  idea  was  immediately  named  chairman  of  a  committee  to 
carry it out, and old army jokes  were revived warning people  to 
keep  their mouths shut at meetings  if  they did not want to "vol-
unteer"  for  leadership.  Leaders  who  were  not  responsive  to 
group demands or could not persuade members to carry out their 
proposals were extruded at the earliest opportunity. 

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  139  • 

Organizational  responsiveness  was  also  encouraged  by  the 
availability  of  general  or  instrumental  leaders,  individuals  who 
wanted to lead but had no strong preferences for a  specific organ· 
ization  or  program  and  were  thus  flexible  enough  to  provide 
leadership  to  any  group  or  cause  willing  to  put  them  in  office. 
Three  types  of general  leaders  played  an  important  role  in  the 
community's origin. 

Some people were motivated by such strong personal  needs for 
being leaders  that, given  the early shortage of leaders,  they were 
willing  to  become  general  leaders  instead  of  waiting  for  the 
specific  organizations  they  preferred.  One woman  explained  her 
transformation  from  a  specific  to  a  general  leader  as  follows:  "I 
wanted to be active when I  first came here;  I  have a need for  it in 
spurts  and  this  was  the  year  I  needed  it.  I  had  been  cooped  up 
with  three children  for  a  whole year  before  and  had a  desperate 
need to be active. The Sisterhood happened to be the first  thing I 
was asked to be active in and so  I  became active  in it.  Now I'm a 
little sorry because I  want to organize a nursery school more,  but 
I have an obligation to the Sisterhood." 

The most frequent and most reliable source of general  leader-
ship  came  from  occupationally  motivated  individuals,  however. 
The lawyers, salesmen, realtors, and local retailers who needed to 
advertise  their  presence  in  the  community,  and  had  to  do  so  at 
once,  provided  the  community  with  leadership  talent  at  a  time 
when  other residents  were  still  settling down  in  their  houses  or 
exploring the  block for  friends.  Since  their livelihood depended 
on  it,  they  were  ready  to  move  into  any  organization  which 
needed  them,  to  encourage  its  growth  so  as  to obtain  more  per-
sonal  publicity,  community  stature,  and  new  business  contacts, 
and  to  lead  it in  whatever  directions  the  membe~ preferred  or 
accepted.  Most  of  these  general  leaders  enjoyed  their  organiza-
tional activity,  for  it required many of the same social skills they 
used  in their jobs:  "I like to join and it's good  for  business,"  one 
salesman  pointed out. "I feel  bad every  time I  go past the school 
and see a meeting I  hadn't known about. But I'm not involved in 
any of the organizations  .  .  .  the only organization  I  really care 
about is  the church." This man switched jobs several  times until 
he found a company which encouraged his joining, and as he put 
it,  "They  said  the  more  groups  I  joined,  the  better,  as  long  as 
they're not political." 

A  third  type  of general  leader functioned  in  interstitial capac-

•  140  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

ities.  He was  usually  a  man  looking for  a  better job, and was  in-
terested  in  organizational  activities  that would  publicize  him  in 
the community.  He provided  leadership  in  the  interstices of  the 
community,  wherever  there  were  "holes"  not  being  filled  by 
others  or  activities  that  had  to  be  done  quickly.  Interstitial 
leaders  gravitated  particularly  to  the  political  parties  and  were, 
of  course,  hoping  for  political  jobs  as  a  reward  for  their  work. 
Lawyers also functioned as  interstitial leaders, making themselves 
available  to organizations as negotiators, arbitrators, and brokers. 
Bound  by  codes  of  ethics  that  guaranteed  clients  secrecy,  they 
were  particularly  useful  as  go·betweens  and  "fixers"  to  resolve 
conflicts  among community groups and  between  petitioners and 
government. 

Unintended  organizations  were,  by  definition,  responsive  to 
some  sudden  community need.  These brought forth  unintended 
leaders,  people  who  had  not _thought  about  being active  before 
coming to Levittown and who often became leaders because they 
felt  they  had  to,  not  because  they  wanted  to.  Occasionally,  such 
people discovered  hidden leadership needs  and skills  in  the  pro-
cess.  One woman, who had not belonged to an organization since 
high school,  began by starting a neighborhood club to relieve her 
loneliness,  and  before  long,  she  was  named  president  of  Levit-
town's  largest  church  women's  club.  "I  didn't  want  it  and  I 
didn't campaign  for  it,"  she  later  explained,  "but some  women 
asked  me  and  I  said  yes.  Now  I  love  it.  Before  Levittown,  I  al-
ways  kept things inside." She was exceptional, however, and most 
founders  who  lacked  leadership needs or talents  soon  passed  the 
responsibility to more suitable colleagues. 

Politicians  had  to  be  particularly  responsive,  not  only  to  get 
themselves  elected,  but  at  first  also  to  recruit  workers  into  the 
party. The fate  of the old residents on  the Township Committee 
and  the  Board  of  Education  had  demonstrated  clearly  how  the 
voters  would  react  to  government  unresponsiv«ness.  Even  the 
builder, who had  the most power in the community and was  not 
accountable to anyone except prospective purchasers, was respon· 
sive  to  resident demands when  they did not conflict with  higher 
priorities.  He  eliminated  plans  for  a  small  shopping  center  and 
several  gas  stations  upon  resident  protest,  and  in  Ig6o,  decided 
not  to  build  an  $I I ,ooo  house  because  he  felt  his  earlier  cus-
tomers  would  resent  his  attempt  to  attract  lower-income  pur-
chasers  to  the  community.  When  resident  demands  did conflict 

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  141  • 

with higher priorities,  the builder was apt to be less responsive-
as  in the case of expanding the schools  to reduce classroom  size-
but when  enough  Levittowners cared,  they could  force  him  into 
responsiveness  by  voting  against  government  officials  who  had 
supported his requests. 

What  brought  a  community  into  being  in  Levittown,  then, 
was not the pre-occupancy aspirations of the residents, but rather 
a  complex process of external  initiative and subsequent  internal 
transformation  that  produced  organizations  and  institutions 
which  reflected  the backgrounds and  interests of  the  majority of 
the  population.  The  new  Levittowners  had  not  thought  much 
about their future community life  before  they  arrived,  but once 
they had settled down,  they chose  to enter the community being 
founded for them and then to alter it to meet their requirements. 
These choices were  based  less  on explicit  individual  wishes  than 
on requirements themselves generated by  the community;  that is, 
people went  into and reshaped  the  organizations  on  the  basis  of 
needs  that  had  developed  in  the  situation  in  which  they  found 
themselves  in  Levittown.  The  principal  situation  was  the  pres-
ence  of the  kinds of people with whom  they  lived,  for  insofar as 
Levittowners used  organizations  for  sorting  purposes  and  sorted 
themselves as  they  did,  they were reacting  to  the population  mix 
that  had  come  about  in  Levittown.  Ultimately,  then,  the  com-
munity evolved as  it did because  of the kinds of people who  had 
decided, each on  his own,  to  buy a  house in Levittown, organiza-
tional  and  political  life  uniting  them  for  cooperative  ventures, 
segregating  them  for  competitive  ones,  and  bringing about class 
and  other conflicts  to  determine  which  elements  of  the  popula-
tion  mix would  have  power  over  the  whole. 

As a result, it would be absurd to argue that Levittown evolved 
out of a conspiracy,  either on the  part of a  profit-seeking builder 
to entice buyers into his development or on  the  part of  national 
organizations intent on adding to  their membership rolls among 
an  essentially  captive  audience.  Indeed,  few  Levittowners  ob· 
jected  that  many  of their organizations were  national  ones  initi-
ated from outside, and I am not sure that very many even noticed 
it.  Not everyone  was  happy with  what  Levitt  had  wrought,  and 
many  were  unhappy  over  the  conflict  generated  by  definitional 
struggles and by township politics, yet the events that made them 
unhappy  were  rarely  conspiratorial  or dictatorial  measures,  but 
almost  always  the outcomes of organizational  and  political  com-

•  142  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

promises required by the need to establish a  community quickly 
and to cope with the diverse requirements of that community. In 
the  end,  the  community  was  an  expression  of  the  lower  middle 
class  culture  of  the  majority,  altered  somewhat  to  accede  to  the 
demands of insistent minorities. 

Prerequisites for  Community Origin 

Although  it is  dangerous  to  generalize from  one  new  commu-
nity, at least  seven  prerequisites seem  to be necessary,  or at least 
helpful,  for  the  formation  of  new  communities  like  Levittown. 
First,  the  new  populatitm  must  be  culturally  and  emotionally 
"open," receptive to interaction with strangers, even from a some-
what  different  background,  and  trusting  enough  to  participate 
with them in joint enterprises.  At the same  time,  sufficient social 
and cultural homogeneity is required to enable strangers to talk to 
each  other  without  immediate  conflict  over  values,  and  equally 
important,  they  must  face  a  common  situation  that  places  them 
all  in  the  same  boat.  Second,  the  population  must  have  some 
needs  that cannot be met in the  home and on the block.  Third, 
group  formation  is  enhanced  if  there  is  sufficient  population 
heterogeneity to create minorities or socially isolated groups who 
need organizations and who are socially skilled enough to partici-
pate in them1in order to eliminate their isolation. 

Fourth,  there must be residents with some  incentive to under-
take  founding  and  leadership  tasks.  In a  heterogeneous commu-
nity,  these must include general  leaders who are willing to carry 
out membership demands  that may conflict  with their own  pref-
erences.  Community  prestige  is  usually  a  sufficient  incentive  for 
recruitment of needed  leaders,  particularly  if  the class  structure 
is  open  enough  to  allow  low-status  people  to  achieve  upward 
mobility through leadership.  A  most effective second incentive is 
occupational,  and  if  there are  sufficient  lawyers,  insurance  sales-
men, and  merchants  in the  population,  they  will  perform  many 
of the needed general  leadership roles.  Fifth, leaders with  previ-
ous  experience  can  reduce  organizational  floundering,  and  may 
prevent the dissolution of groups during the early interorganiza-
tional competition. 

Sixth,  organizational  formation  and  community  activity  gen-
erally are enhanced by conflict and crisis.  Participation  in politi-
cal  and civic affairs  is  assured  if there is  disagreement,  especially 
if the most important goals people bring with them into the com-

•  143  • 

The  Origin  of  a  Community 
munity are  threatened.  If a  population  is  homogeneous  and  its 
political  institutions are responsive  to  its  needs,  it is  unlikely  to 
participate  except  to  vote,  and  even  then  may  do  so  in  limited 
number,  leaving  the  decision-making  task  to  a  small  elite.  If a 
population  is  heterogeneous,  however,  and  the  demands  of  a 
significant  proportion  are  downgraded  or  ignored,  these  are 
likely to form pressure groups and political factions. 

Seventh,  community  participation  requires  physical  facilities 
for meetings and some organs of communication to publicize the 
existence  of organizations.  The  latter  can  be  created  as  part  of 
the  origin  process,  but  meeting  rooms  and  small  auditoriums 
must be available  to facilitate  the creation  of organizations with 
more members than can fit into a living room. 

THE NATURE  OF A NEW COMMUNITY 

Whether or not  the  outcomes  of  the diverse  processes  described 
above result in a  community depends in  part on one's definition 
of  the  term.  Strictly  speaking,  what  emerged  in  Levittown  was 
the  typical  array of municipal bodies and  individual  associations 
which worked together when common interests were at stake, but 
competed  most  of  the  time.  Many  associations  also  had  ties  to 
county, state, and national bodies that were more important than 
their ties to other Levittown organizations.U 

These  groups,  taken  together,  were  commonly  thought  to  be 
"the  community,"  mainly  because  their  activities  took  place 
within  the  township  limits  and  their  jurisdictions  began  and 
ended  there.  Their influence  was  limited  to  the  population  liv-
ing  within  those  limits,  but  they  could  act  on  this  population, 
make  rules  regulating  its  behavior,  and  even  speak  in  its  behalf 
to  people  who  lived  outside.  For  example,  an  outsider  curious 
about  the  ideas  and  attitudes of  Levittown  women  would  prob-
ably ask  the Women's  Club, and  its  leaders would feel  that  they 
could  speak  for  all  Levittown  women.  In  reality,  they  did  not 
even  represent  all  who  belonged  to  their  own  or  the  other 
women's  clubs,  but  neither  did  any  other  visible  community 
group, and thus each  felt  itself free  to speak  for  the community, 
and-more important-make demands on  the community which 
were claimed  to  benefit  it.  Residents tended to accept the formal 
organizations  as  representing  the  community,  for  when  I  inter-
viewed leaders of less  formal  clubs, explaining that I  was  making 

•  144  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

a study of the community, they were often reluctant to talk about 
their  groups, because  they  did  not consider them to  be a  part of 
that body they defined as "the community." 12 

Since  most  Levittowners did  not  participate actively  in  the so-
called  community  organizations,  the  community  that  had  been 
originated in their names was of minor importance in their lives. 
What involved them deeply was their house and the lot on which 
it stood,  the  adjacent  neighbors  and  perhaps  the  block,  friends 
elsewhere  in  Levittown,  and  the  particular  church  or  organiza-
tion  in  which  they were  active. 13  If one could measure  "sense of 
community,"  it embraced  only  these,  but not  the community or 
even the neighborhood in which  they had bought.  Neighborhood 
boundaries  had  little  meaning,  for  units  of  1200  families  were 
too  large  for  face-to-face  relations,  and  even  the  so-called  neigh-
borhood clubs  usually  recruited  from  only a  block  or two.  Chil-
dren  who  attended  neighborhood  schools  may  have  felt  neigh-
borhood  loyalty,  based  on a  childish  belief  that  their school  was 
better  than  others,  but since  some  students  were  bused  in  from 
other  neighborhoods,  not  even  the  schools  were  pure  neighbor-
hood organizations. Some adults described their neighborhood as 
the  best  and  friendliest  in  town,  but  further  probing  indicated 
that  they  were  really  talking  about  their  own  block,  although 
some insisted that other neighborhoods were inferior because  the 
houses were built closer  together or were of poorer construction. 
The feelings  about  the  block,  neighbors,  friends,  and  favorite 
organizations  were  sometimes  translated  into  a  more  general 
identification  with  Levittown  as  the  best  possible  place  to  live, 
and  some  people  took  pride  in  a  winning  football  team  or  an 
organizational  achievement  that  lent  distinction  to  Levittown. 
These  feelings  were  neither  intense  nor  of  long  duration;  they 
were generated  less  by intrinsic qualities of the community than 
by  the  desire  to  put  Levittown  "on  the  map"  in  the  unending 
competition  with  other  communities.  "The  map"  was  usually 
Burlington  County,  but  when  L.Y.S.A.  asked  the  Township 
Committee to finance a  local  team  to play  in the county baseball 
league,  it  pointed  out  that  this  league  was  regularly  scouted  by 
the majors,  so  that a  $woo municipal  subsidy might one day en-
able a  Levittowner to represent the community in  the  American 
or  National  League.  Even  the  name  change  that  transformed 
Levittown into Willingboro was  justified largely by  the negative 
headlines about the town  in  the  Philadelphia area  press,  and re-

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  145  • 

fleeted  less  a  concern  about  the  community  than  the  belief  that 
the  name  created  a  community  image  (and  a  persona  for  its 
residents) which they wanted the outside world to respect. 

There were,  of course,  attempts  to  instill  "community  spirit" 
by  merchants,  party  leaders,  club  presidents,  municipal  officials, 
and  other  boosters  hoping  to  motivate  their  constituents  to 
greater effort for  their particular agency. Some residents believed 
deeply in community spirit and praised Levittowners for  having 
more of it than their previous neighbors, but what they meant by 
it was  a  willingness  to act unselfishly  toward other Levittowners. 
For example, a  man who missed a  night's work and pay  in order 
to coach  his  Little  League  team was described as  having commu· 
nity spirit, and so  were  the people who sent donations and cards 
to a just-widowed Levittowner and prayed for a  little girl, new in 
the community, who would be dead of cancer in six months. This 
kind  of community spirit  reflected  mutual  help  patterns  among 
neighbors more than an attitude toward the community, and de-
veloped only in  personal  or organ1zational crises and disasters.  It 
could  not  have  been  generated-and  would  not  have  been  ex· 
pected-for events and political issues which  might deprive some 
Levittowners and  benefit others.  Perhaps if  the community were 
threatened  by  powerful  outside  forces  which  would  hurt  the 
community as  a  whole  or deprive  every  Levittowner,  an  intense 
identification  with  the  community  might  be  created,  but  most 
people  hoped such a  threat would never develop.  Even  if it did, 
the  resulting  cohesion  would  be  only  transitory,  disappearing 
once  the  threat  was  removed  or leading  to disaffection  with  the 
community and  eventual  departure  if  it could  not  be  removed. 
By any traditional  criteria,  then,  Levittown could not  be con· 
sidered  a  community.  It was  not an  economic  unit whose  mem· 
hers  were  dependent  on  each  other  for  their  livelihood,  and  it 
was not a social  unit for there was  no reason or incentive for peo· 
pie  to  relate  to  each  other as  Levittowners  on any  regular or re· 
curring basis.  And Levittown was  clearly not a  symbolic unit, for 
the  sense  of community  was  weak.  If Levittown  was  a  commu-
nity,  and  of  course  it  was,  it  could  best  be  defined  as  an 
administrative-political  unit  plus  an  aggregate  of  community-
wide associations within a  space that had been legally established 
by  William  Penn  and  his  associates  as  a  township  some  three 
hundred  years  before. 14  As  such,  it  provided  residents  with  a 
variety of services and required them  to act in a  limited number 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

of community roles-for example, as voters, taxpayers, and organ· 
izational participants-but these roles encouraged division rather 
than cohesion. 

Indeed,  just  because  Levittown  was  only  a  loose  network  of 
groups  and  institutions  it  was  possible  for  these  to  develop 
quickly  and  in  large  numbers.  Had  the  community  been  a  co-
hesive  social  body,  there  would have  been  fewer  groups,  for  the 
founding  of  additional  ones  would  have  signified  an  intrusion 
into a  tight-knit social  body.  Conversely,  not being a social  body, 
Levittown needed to find  groups,  people, and symbols to make it 
appear as a body to other communities-which were equally busy 
persuading  Levittowners  that  they  were  social  bodies.  The  at-
tempts of  the builder and,  later,  the  township fathers  to require 
stores and gas stations to adopt a  uniform pseudo-Colonial fat;ade 
for their buildings was,  likewise, an architectural means for creat-
ing a  unity and cohesion  that  did  not  exist  in  the  social  system. 
I  do  not  mean  to  downgrade  Levittown  as  a  community,  for 
my  observations  apply  equally to  all  other communities,  urban 
and  suburban,  and  probably  even  to  most  communities  of  the 
past,  including  those  now  celebrated  as  cohesive  units. 15  More· 
over,  Levittown  probably  displayed  a  greater  sense  of  commu-
nity, social  cohesion,  and symbolic  (as  well  as  spatial)  unity than 
established  and  more  typical  settlements,  if  only  because  it  was 
new and  because  it was  atypical  in its  architectural  homogeneity 
and the youthfulness of its population.  It also had a  stronger self-
image as  a  community  than  Levittown,  Long Island,  which,  be-
ing spread over many municipalities, has had to debate with itself 
whether  it  was  a  community or not. 16  My  argument  here  is  not 
with  Levittown,  then,  but with  critics  who  seek  to  find  a  social 
unit in the community where none exists, and with romantic city 
planners, abetted by nostalgic social critics, who want to "revive" 
a  sense  of community  that never  was  save  in  their  imagination, 
instead of planning for the effective functioning of and improved 
living conditions  in  those  aggregates  to which we give  the name 
"community." 

Newness and Deliberate Innovation 

City  planners usually  reserve  the  term  "new  town"  for  a com-
munity  that contains  enough  employment opportunities  to  pro-
vide jobs for  about half of its  residents.  In this sense,  Levittown 
was  not a  new  town,  for even  if it had been able to attract indus-

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  147  • 

try,  not  enough  land  was  reserved  for  this  purpose  to  employ 
more  than  a  fraction  of  all  Levittowners.  Physically  Levittown 
was,  of course,  new,  yet  in  many ways  it  was  not a  new commu-
nity. The people who moved  there wanted  a  new house but not a 
new  life,  and  the  community  they  established  was  'not  particu-
larly  novel.  None  of  its  organizations,  institutions,  and  public 
agencies were  distinctive,  or different from  those  one might find 
in a community of other young families of similar socioeconomic 
level.  Indeed, many factors  in its origin discouraged  novelty and 
innovation.  Both  External  and  Internal  founding  encouraged 
the  establishment  of  previously  existing  organizations  and 
churches  in  Levittown,  and  once  started,  these  as  well  as  Unin· 
tended  groups  looked  desperately  for  people  with  "experience." 
As  a  result,  new  organizations  adopted  old  structural  and  pro-
grammatic  ideas  that had worked  elsewhere.  In fact,  the need  to 
assure  the  survival  of  the  group and  develop  a  routine  discour-
aged  innovation  and  experimentation,  which  took  place  either 
because  there was  no other alternative or because  only a  new so-
lution  would  fit  the needs  of the moment.  For example,  the  Re-
publican invention of the "bandwagon" resulted from  the lack of 
experienced campaigners and speechmakers and  the need  for  an 
alternative  method  of reaching  the  voters.  When  proposals were 
advanced  as  deliberate  innovations  and  experiments  they  were 
likely  to  be  rejected,  because  people  resented  being  used  as 
guinea  pigs,  particularly  when  the  call  for  innovation  and  ex-
perimentation came  from  the  cosmopolitans.  Levittowners  were 
perfectly  willing  to  innovate  and  experiment  in  their  own 
homes, but not at the community level. 

The fact  remains,  however,  that  Levittown  was  planned  from 
scratch by the builder and the consultants who worked with him, 
~nd by the External agencies who came in to found organizations 
before Levittown was  even six months old. It is,  therefore, worth 
while  asking  whether  deliberate  planning  could  have  gone  one 
step  further  and  introduced innovations prior to  the opening of 
the community,  presenting the arriving Levittowners with a  fait 
accompli.  Would  early  initiative  combined  with  organizational 
know-how have enabled school,  church, and organizational  plan-
ners  to  lay  out a  novel  community structure  which  would  have 
been so  appropriate  to  the  Levittowners'  needs  that  they  would 
have  accepted  it and  thus made  Levittown a  really new  commu· 
nity? 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Much of the know-how was available; from information on the 
price range and  the number of houses  to  be built in  Levittown, 
an  organizational  planner  could  have  used  (as  did  the  research 
departments  of  the  Protestant  denominations)  data  from  previ-
ous Levittowns to predict fairly accurately the array and range of 
organizations and  institutions  that would be relevant to the new 
population.  He might even have been able to start them, for once 
Levittown was  occupied, anyone who decided  to set  up a  specific 
organization  thereby  generated  processes  which  encouraged  its 
survivaL  That  the  planner  could  also  have  programmed  the 
memberships and activities of these groups is,  however, doubtfuL 
Unless he could have accurately predicted what minorities would 
find  themselves  at  a  loss  on  the  block  and  what  sorting  criteria 
would  eventually  have  emerged  out  of  the  population  mix,  his 
plans would surely have  been diverted once  the Levittowners ar-
rived,  and  the  organizations  would  have  been  changed  to  meet 
the  needs  that  developed  after  their  arrivaL  Prior  planning 
might  even  have  increased  the  d~version,  for  the  new  residents 
would  have  been  suspicious  that  organizations  already  in  exis-
tence  were  set  up  for  some  ulterior  purpose  on  the  part  of  the 
builder  or  the  old  residents,  and  might  therefore  have  stayed 
away from them altogether. 

Perhaps Levitt's consultants and the old residents were right in 
their  unwillingness  to  plan  without  constituents,  to  schedule 
only  the  institutional  shells  and  let  the  Levittowners  fill  in  the 
details  once  they  arrived.  In  fact,  more  attention  should  have 
been paid to these shells.  For example, more accurate population 
estimates  might  have  ensured  elementary  schools  with  enough 
classrooms  to  keep  class  size  at  the  intended leveL  An  organiza-
tional  planner  might  also  have  been  helpful  to  small  organiza-
tions which  lacked  the communications skills  to  find  enough eli-
gible  or  interested  people  among  the  mass  of  Levittowners,  and 
he  might  have  been  able  to  bring  organizations  into  being  to 
provide  activities  and  viewpoints  not  available  in  the  commu-
nity.  As  of  1961,  there were  no  mental  health clinics  or counsel-
ing centers, almost no recreation opportunities for girls,  no high-
culture organizations, no local  and national  political groups that 
offered  the community alternative points  of view-for example, 
the Americans for Democratic Action or a local citizens' planning 
group.  Given  the  small  number  of  residents  with  the  requisite 
interests,  however,  it  is  not  certain  whether  such  groups  could 

The  Origin  of  a  Community 

•  149  • 

have survived even  if they had been started by a  professional  or-
ganizer. 

Ultimately,  any  attempt  at  significant  organizational  innova-
tion would probably have foundered  because  Levittowners came 
not to build a  new community but to move  into a  new  house  in 
which  they could  carry on old ways  of family life,  neighbor rela-
tions,  and  civic  activity.  Perhaps  the  only new  communities are 
utopian ones formed deliberately by people who have decided  to 
alter  their  life  according  to  a  common  plan,  and  such  people 
would  not  have  considered  buying  in  Levittown.  A  few  Levit-
towners  came  to  start a  new  life  or  make  significant  changes  in 
the old one, and some  came with a fragile  hope  that,  somehow,  a 
virginal community would avoid the problems and conflicts of an 
established one.  This hope was  soon  dashed  by  the  necessities  of 
the origin  process.  As  one of  the  first  arrivals  recalled  later:  "I 
was  so  naive  before  I  moved here.  I  didn't  think there would  be 
any juvenile delinquency;  I  thought only angels were  moving in. 
It never occurred  to  me  that  people are  people no matter where 
you  live."  She  put it well,  for  people being people,  they brought 
their  cultures  with  them  and  the  community  they  established 
thus  only  re-created  old  life  styles  and  institutions  on  new  soil. 

NOTES 

1.  Clark has  called  these  "packaged"  suburbs  because  their  builders 
provided  at  least  some  of  the  community  facilities  that  go  with 
the  house.  The term  is  apt,  but it underemphasizes  the extent  to 
which  the  population,  once  arrived,  shapes  the  contents  of  the 
package  to suit its  own needs.  See  Clark,  pp.  6-7. 

2.  Form (1951),  pp.  127-130. 
3·  Similar people in Levittown, Long Island were described as  "Com-
munists,"  perhaps because  the community conflict took place dur-
ing the  McCarthy era.  See  Liell  (1952),  pp.  273ft. 

4·  Similar  departures  have  been  observed  in  Greenbelt,  Maryland, 
by  Form  (1944),  pp.  283ff;  and  in  Park  Forest,  Illinois,  by  Cans 
(1953),  p.  7· 

5·  On the role of pioneers in Levittown,  New York,  and Park Forest, 
Illinois, see  Liell (1952),  p.  258;  and Whyte  (1956),  pp.  31o-311. 
6.  Upper  middle  class  suh'.!rbs  have,  however,  rejected  political 

bosses.  Wood  (1959),  pp.  166-175. 

7·  Soon  after  the  community  opened,  Levitt  built  a  four-bedroom 
version  of the $14,000  model,  but it was  often  in short supply,  so 

•  150  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

that  family  size  remained  a  significant  determinant  of  house 
choice. 

8.  On the block, where leaders were ordinary residents and behaved 
more  in line with  their  backgrounds,  the  usual  status  judgments 
could  be  made;  indeed,  neighbors  often  wondered  how  people 
who acted as if they were of low status could be so successful out-
side  the  block. 

9·  Since the houses were neither visibly more statusful nor function-
ally much better than  the cheaper models,  few  Levittowners were 
interested  in  exchanging  them  for  what  they  had,  although  in 
Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  a  neighborhood  of  more  expensive 
houses did attract more affiuent and higher-status people who had 
become  dissatisfied  with  their  cheaper  models.  By  1966,  Levitt 
began  to  build  higher-priced  houses  again,  locating  them  (as 
planned  earlier)  on  the  Rancocas  River  at  the  extreme  edge  of 
the  community. 

10.  The politicians,  of course,  prefer voting  blocs,  since  these  can  be 
reached more easily during election campaigns. However., not even 
the  Catholic  bloc  leaders  could  control  the  vote  of  their  coreli· 
gionists. The small neighborhood of higher-priced houses and the 
larger  neighborhoods  that  were  settled  later  immediately  organ-
ized  civic  associations  to  defend  their interests  against  a  govern-
ment  then  controlled  by  the  first  arrivals,  and  new  areas  have 
sometimes voted differently from older ones on some issues. 

11.  A  study of a Scottish new town described its social organization as 
"a host of small internally interacting groups between which there 
are  no connecting  links."  Hole,  p.  171. 

12.  In Levittown, Pennsylvania, people active in  formal organizations 
considered  themselves  as  belonging  to  the  community  and  per· 
ceived it more accurately  than  the  inactive. Jahoda et al.,  p.  145· 

13.  Hole,  p.  168. 
14·  For  a  similar  analysis  of  the  suburban  community,  see  Greer 

(1g6o), pp. 51g-520. 

15.  An  insightful  analysis  of the  absence  of  "community"  in  the  re-
vered  Athenian  polis,  and  of  the  same  divisive  class  conflicts  as-
sociated  with  the  modern  city,  is  to  be  found  in  Gouldner, 
Chap.  4· 

16.  Orzack and Sanders, pp. 3-u; and Dobriner (1963),  pp.  uS-125. 

DDDDDD 
DDDDDD 

Part  2  ·THE QUALITY  OF 

SUBURBAN  LIFE 

DDDDDD 

D 

Chapter Eight 

D 

SOCIAL  LIFE:  SUBURBAN 

HOMOGENEITY  AND 
CONFORMITY 

D 

D 

IN  PART  TWO,  MY  FOCUS  SHIFTS  FROM  LEVITTOWN  TO  THE  LEVIT· 
towners,  and  from  a  historical  to  a  cross-sectional  perspective-
from  the  community  to  the  people  and  the  way  they  live  at  a 
specific  point  in  time.  Some  critics  charge  that  suburban  life  is 
socially,  culturally,  and  emotionally  destructive,  and  that  the 
causes  are  to  be  found  in  the  nature  of  suburbia  and  the  move 
from  the  city.  Testing  their  charges  requires  evaluation  of  the 
quality  of  Levittown  life  and  measurement  of  Levittown's  im-
pact on  its residents  to  determine what changes  in  behavior and 
attitudes  have  actually  resulted  from  the  move. 

Many  of  the  findings  on  Levittown's  impact are  based  on  in-
terviews  with  two  sets  of  Levittowners,  one  a  nearly  random 
sample  of 45  buyers  in Somerset  Park,  the  first  neighborhood  to 
be settled, and the second, of 55  others in that neighborhood who 
had moved  there from  Philadelphia, here called the Philadelphia 
or  city  sample.  The  two  samples  were  interviewed  during  tg6o 
and  1961,  after  they  had  lived  in  Levittown  two  to  three  years, 
and this determines  the  period on which  the cross-sectional  anal-
ysis  is  reporting.  (The  random  sample  was  also  interviewed  just 
after  its  arrival  in  Levittown,  thus  providing  data  on  the  im-
mediate  impact of  the move  as  well.)  Both samples are  small  and 
not entirely random, so  that the statistics cannot supply the final 

•  153  • 

•  154  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

scientific  proof  that statistics often  imply,  but  they  do  illustrate 
what happened to people as a  result of moving to Levittown. 

THE  QUALITY  OF  SOCIAL  LIFE 

Perhaps  the most  frequent  indictment of suburban life  has  been 
leveled  against  the  quality  of  social  relationships.  The  critics 
charge  that the suburbs  are  socially  hyperactive  and  have  made 
people  so  outgoing  that  they  have  little  time  or  inclination  for 
the  development  of  personal  autonomy.  The  pervasive  homo-
geneity of the  population has depressed  the vitality of social  life, 
and the absence of more heterogeneous neighbors and friends  has 
imposed  a  conformity  which  further  reduces  the  suburbanite's 
individuality.  Indeed, studies showing the importance of physical 
propinquity  in  the  choice  of  friends  have  been  interpreted  to 
suggest  that  physical  layout,  rather  than  people,  determines  the 
choice  of  friends.  Because  many  suburbanites  are  Transients  or 
Mobiles,  they  have  been  accused  of  wanting  social  companions 
only for  the duration of their stay, disabling them for more inti-
mate friendship. 1 

Evidence  from  Levittown  suggests  quite  the  opposite.  People 
report an  accelerated social  life,  and in fact  looked forward  to  it 
before  moving to  Levittown.  The major reason  for  the  upswing 
is  indeed  homogeneity,  but an  equally  appropriate  term  might 
be "compatibility." Propinquity may initiate social contact but it 
does  not  determine  friendship.  Many  relationships  are  indeed 
transient,  but this  is no reflection on  their intensity. Finally. con-
formity  prevails,  although  less  as  malicious  or  passive  copying 
than as  sharing of useful  ideas.  In short, many of the phenomena 
identified by the critics occur in Levittown but their alleged con-
sequences  do  not  follow.  Levittowners  have  not  become  out-
going,  mindless  conformers;  they  remain  individuals,  fulfilling 
the  social  aspirai:Ions  with  which  they  came.  To be  sure,  social 
life  in Levittown has its costs,  but these seem minor compared to 
its rewards. 

Neighboring 2 

About  half  the  Levittowners  interviewed  said  that  they  were 
visiting  more  with  neighbors  than  in  their  former  residence; 
about a  quarter said  less,  and the remaining quarter reported no 
change.8  The greatest  increase  was  reported  by  the  people  who 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  155  • 

said they had wanted to do more visiting,  particularly those  who 
had  had  little opportunity  for  it in their  previous  residence.  As 
one Philadelphian said, "We used  to be with the in-laws and with 
my mother;  we  didn't bother with the neighbors before."  Others 
had  lacked  compatible  neighbors;  people  living  in  apartments 
had  found  few  opportunities  to  get  acquainted,  and  those  in 
older  or  transitional  areas  had  found  their  fellow  residents  un-
suitable. This was  as  true of former suburbanites and small-town 
residents  as  of  those  from  cities,  and  affected  owners  as  well  as 
renters.  One  homeowner  explained,  "Here  in  Levittown  I  have 
more in common;  where  we  lived  before,  the neighbors were all 
my mother's age." 

In addition to  the desire  to do more neighboring,  the  increase 
resulted  initially  from  the  newness  of  the  community  and  the 
lack of shopping facilities and other places for daytime activities. 
But these reasons were mentioned far less often than  the "friend-
liness"  of the neighbors, and this in  turn was  a function of popu-
lation  homogeneity.  One  Levittowner,  describing  her  next-door 
neighbor, said,  "We see eye  to  eye  on  things,  about  raising  kids, 
doing  things  together with  your  husband,  living  the  same  way; 
we  have  practically the same  identical  background."  Conversely, 
the  people who  reported  less  neighboring were  those  who could 
not find  compatible  people  on  the  block:  older ones,  some  (but 
not all)  people  of  highest  and  lowest  status,  and those  who  had 
difficulties  in  relating  to  neighbors,  particularly  second  genera-
tion  Jewish  women  from  Philadelphia  who  were  used  to  living 
among Jewish  neighbors. 4  A  handful  wanted  to continue spend-
ing their social  life with relatives or preferred to  have nothing to 
do with n;ighbors. 

Of course,  some  friendliness  was  built into  the  neighbor rela-
tionship, for  people needed each other for  mutual aid.  In a com-
munity far  from  the  city,  women  are  cut off  from  relatives  and 
old friends-as well as  from commuting husbands-so that readi-
ness  to  provide  mutual  aid  is  the  first  criterion of  being a  good 
neighbor. This includes not only helping out in emergencies, but 
ameliorating periodic loneliness by being available for occasional 
coffee-klatsching and offering  informal  therapy  by being willing 
to  lister.  to  another's  troubles when  necessary.  Helping out also 
offers an opportunity-rare in everyday life-to practice  the  dic-
tates  of  the  Judeo-Christian  ethic,  and  brings  appropriate  emo-
tional  rewards.  The  reciprocity  engendered  by  mutual  aid  en-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

courages-and  allows-neighbors  to  keep  a  constant  watch  on 
each  other,  as  they do  in established  neighborhoods everywhere. 
One  night  I  drove  out  of my driveway  at a  slightly  higher  than 
usual  speed,  and my next-door neighbor came over  to find  out if 
anything was  wrong,  although  later he wondered whether in  his 
desire to be a good neighbor he had violated the norms of privacy 
and was  being  too  nosy.  The mutual observation  that makes  the 
block a  goldfish  bowl  goes  on mainly among adjacent neighbors, 
for with houses only ten feet apart,  they see each other frequently 
and  have  to  maintain  friendly  relations  if  that  is  at  all  possible. 
More  distant  neighbors  could  be  ignored,  however.  Indeed,  a 
Levittowner  who  had  moved  from  a  cohesive  working class  dis-
trict  said,  "It's  not  like  Philadelphia  here.  There  you  might 
know  someone  four  blocks  down  the  road  as  well  as  your  next-
door  neighbor.  Here  you  don't  know  people  down  the  road." 
The  block  was  a  social  unit only  to  assure  a  modicum  of  house 
and lawn care,  beyond which  there was  no  obligation for  neigh-
bors to associate. 

Even propinquity did not require visiting. Although a number 
of studies have shown  that social  relationships are influenced and 
even  determined by  the site  plan,  this was  not  the case  in  Levit-
town.5  Since  Levittown  was  laid  out with  curved  blocks,  houses 
facing each  other across front and back,  there were relatively few 
neighbors  with  whom  one  had  constant  and  involuntary  visual 
contact.  Sometimes,  even  relationships  with  directly  adjacent 
neighbors  could  be  restricted  to  an  exchange  of  hellos.  For  ex-
ample, it took more than a year for me to meet the occupants of a 
house diagonally across  the street from mine, even though we had 
been saying hello since  the first weeks of occupancy. Another per-
son  told me he had never even met his next-door neighbor. Thus, 
despite  a  fairly  high  building density-five  to  six  houses  to  the 
acre-there  was  no  pressure  to  be  sociable.  Neighboring  rarely 
extended more than three or four  houses away  in each direction, 
so  that the "functional neighborhood" usually consisted of about 
ten to twelve  houses at the most, although people did say hello to 
everyone on  the  block. 6  The boundaries of  the functional  neigh-
borhood  were  delimited  either  by  physical  barriers  or by  social 
isolates who interrupted the flow of social relations. 7 

A  more systematic  test of the propinquity  theory was  made by 
asking interview respondents  to rank the amount of visiting with 
their  six  most  adjacent  neighbors.  If  propinquity  alone  had 

TABLE  4 
VISITING AMONG ADJACENT NEIGHBORS, 
BY AMOUNT OF VISITING 

LOCATION OF 
NEIGHBOR 

Next door, right side 
Next door, left side 
Across the street 
Across the backyard 

Other • 

N 

Ranked Arn,ount of Vjsiting 

PERCENT REPORTING 

First 

Second 

Third 

Fourth 

All 

Not Visited 

!11 
24 
86 
7 

lt 

!11 
88 
u 
7 

2 

15 
20 
28 
82 

10 

14 
14 
28 
27 

28 

(45) 

(42) 

(40) 

(22) 

24 
26 
26 
17 

7 
(149) 

24 
15 
4 
57 

' 

N.A.•• 

(26) 

•  This included other neighbors across  the street or the  backyard when a  house faced or backed  on two  others. 
•• Not asked. 

•  158  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

determined visiting,  one or two of the  most adjacent  neighbors, 
those  on  the right and left sides,  should  have  been  visited  most 
often. As  Table 4  indicates,  however, about three quarters of all 
visiting was equally distributed between these  two and the neigh· 
bor across  the street, who was a  little farther away,  and the latter 
was actually visited most often. If people's first and second choices 
are  combined,  the  data  show  that  31  per cent  chose  right-hand 
neighbors,  an  equal  number  left-hand  ones,  29  per  cent  those 
across the street, and  the rest other adjacent ones. Thus, distance 
does  not  affect choice  of  the closest  neighbors,  although  it does 
discourage visiting  the less  adjacent ones,  and  particularly  back-
yard neighbors.  Because of the  too-foot depths of the lots and the 
heat  of  the  New  Jersey  summer,  people  made  little  use  of  the 
backyards, and the 200 feet  between houses reduced visiting con-
siderably.8 

Some  propinquity studies  have  found  that  visiting  is  affected 
by  the  location  of  the  front  door,  and,  among  women,  of  the 
kitchen  window  from  which  they can  see  their  neighbors  while 
doing  housework.  This  was  not  the  case  in  Levittown.  If the 
front  door  had  been  significant,  owners  of  the  Cape  Cod  and 
ranch houses should have  chosen  their right-hand and across-the-
street neighbors most often;  those  of the  Colonial  houses  should 
have  chosen  their  left-hand and  across-the-street  neighbors.  The 
data  show  that  Cape  Cod  owners  visited  most  often  across  the 
street,  but equally  between  right- and  left-hand  neighbors;  the 
ranch owners chose the left-hand neighbors twice as  often as  their 
other neighbors;  and the Colonial owners showed a  slight prefer-
ence  for  left-hand  neighbors.8  In  the  "kitchen window test,"  the 
expected pattern was found only among Cape Cod house owners, 
but  not  the  other  two.10  Had  location  been  the  prime  deter-
minant  of  friendship  choice,  neighbors  should  also  have  been 
mentioned as  friends more than other Levittowners. Respondents 
said, however, that only 35 per cent of the five  couples they visited 
most  frequently  lived  on  their  street,  and  31  per  cent  said 
that none of these  favorite  couples lived on their street. 11  More-
over, propinquity affected some types of social gatherings but not 
others;  baby showers,  cookouts, and  barbecues drew only nearby 
neighbors;  more  formal  parties  involved  mainly  guests  from 
other streets and neighborhoods. 12 

Since  most  of  the  interview  questions  were  about  adjacent 
neighbors,  the findings are only a  partial  test of the propinquity 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  159  • 

theory.  They suggest  that a  sizeable  functional  distance discour-
ages  visiting,  but  that  among adjacent neighbors,  people  choose 
not  the closest or the ones  they see  most often, but the ones they 
consider  most  compatible.  Indeed,  fully  82  per  cent  of  the  re-
spondents mentioned compatibility as  the reason for choosing the 
neighbor they visited most frequently.  If the site plan had forced 
some neighbors into constant visual  contact-as do  court or cul-
de-sac schemes-they might have reacted by increased visiting (or 
intense  enmity  if they were  incompatible),  but the block  layout 
gave Levittowners the opportunity for choice. 

Neighbor relations among adults were also affected by the chil-
dren,  for  children are neighbors  too,  and  their mingling was  de-
termined  almost  entirely  by  age  and  propinquity.13  The  rela-
tively  traffic-free  streets  and  the  large  supply  of  young  children 
enabled mothers  to limit  their supervision  of  the  children's out-
door play;  and the overall compatibility, to give youngsters a free 
choice  of  playmates.  But  children  were  likely  to  quarrel,  and 
when -this  led  to  fights  and  childish  violence,  their  quarrels  in-
volved  the  parents.  Half the  random sample  had  heard  of quar-
rels  among  neighbors  on  their  block,  and  81  per  cent  of  these 
were  over  the  children.  Adults  quarreled  most  often  when 
childish misbehavior required punishment and parents disagreed 
about methods. If the parents of fighting children agreed  on dis-
cipline,  each  punished  his  child  the  same  way  and  the  incident 
was  soon  forgotten.  If they  disagreed,  however,  the  parent who 
believed in harsh punishment often felt  that the more permissive 
parent,  not  having  punished  "enough,"  was  accusing  the  other 
child  of  having  been  at  fault.  A  single  parental  disagreement 
might be forgiven,  but if it happened repeatedly, an open  break 
between  neighbors  could  result.  Of  seventeen  quarrels  about 
which interview respondents were knowledgeable, nine had been 
concluded  peacefully,  but  in  the  other eight cases,  parents were 
still  not talking to each other.  In one case,  two neighbors finally 
came  to blows and had to be placed on a  peace  bond by the mu-
nicipal court. 

Another type of adult quarrel  involved physical disciplining of 
children  by  neighbors.  Some  people  believe  that  only  parents 
should spank their children; others, that neighbors have the right 
to do so  if the child misbehaves out of sight of the parents. When 
a neighbor punishes another's child, he not only takes on a quasi-
parental  role but, by implication, accuses  the parents of not rais-

•  160  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

ing  and  watching  their  children  properly.  In  one  such  case, 
where a  neighbor punished a  little boy for sexual exhibitionism, 
the parent never spoke to him again. 

Basically,  differences  over discipline reflect  class  differences  in 
child-rearing.  Middle  class  parents  tend  to  be  somewhat  more 
permissive  than  working class  ones,  and when  two children  play 
together, the middle class child may be allowed to act in ways  not 
permitted  to  the  working  class  one.  Also,  working  class  parents 
administer physical  punishmen·t more freely,  since  this  is  not  in-
terpreted  as  a  withdrawal  of  affection,  whereas  middle  class 
families  reserve  spankings  for  extreme  misbehavior.  Then,  as 
children  get  older,  practices  change.  The working  class  child  is 
given more freedom, and by comparison, the middle class child is 
given  much  less.  He  is  expected  to  do  his  homework  while  his 
working  class  peers  may  be  playing  on  the  streets.  Middle  class 
people  who  observe  this  freedom,  as  well  as  the  working  class 
parents'  tolerance  of  childish  profanity,  interpret  it  as  neglect. 
In  some  cases,  middle  class  families  even  prohibit  their  chil-
dren  from  playing  with  working  class  children.  Prohibition  is 
feasible  if children  are  old  enough  to respect  it or if  parents su-
pervise  the  children's  play.  Younger  children  cannot  be  pre-
vented  from  playing  with  each  other,  however,  and  parental 
quarrels may result. If the working class children are older and in 
a  minority, as  they often are on the block,  they may become out-
casts,  and since they are mobile,  may look around for other, simi-
larly discredited  companions.  Out of  this  may  come  a  gang  that 
vandalizes  hostile  middle class  society. 14  People of low  status ex-
perienced  (or  saw)  the  most  quarrels,  for  72  per  cent  of  blue 
collar  respondents  reported  quarrels  in  their  neighborhood,  as 
compared to only 41  per cent of the middle class. 

The repetition of parental conflict over children's quarrels can 
lead  to  increasing  estrangement,  because  other  values  and  be-
havior  patterns  also  differ  between  the  classes.  For  example,  in 
one  case,  what  began  as  a  series  of  minor  disagreements  about 
child-rearing  was  soon  reinforced  by  critical  comments  on  the 
part  of  the  middle  class  people  about  the  working  dass  neigh-
bor's laxity  toward  his  lawn and  his  taste  for  expensive automo-
biles. All  of these disagreements spiraled  into considerable hostil-
ity over  a  year's  time.  Eventually,  one  of  the  feuding  neighbors 
may move out-usually the middle class family  which has  greater 
resources to go elsewhere. 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  161  • 

If the  overall social  climate  of the  block  is  good,  other  neigh-
bors will  try to patch up conflicts between parents. On one block, 
a  child  hit  another  with  a  toy,  drawing  blood  and  requiring  a 
doctor.  The mother of the  injured youngster admitted  it  was  his 
fault and suggested  to  the other mother  that  the  two  children  be 
kept apart for a  few  days.  However, she did not punish her child 
at once,  and  this  was  resented  by  the  other  mother  (of  working 
class  background).  She,  in  turn,  forbade  her  child  to  see  the 
guilty  one,  and  both  she  and  her  husband  broke  off  with  his 
parents  as  well.  After  about  a  week,  however,  the  feud  ended. 
Each mother told other neighbors of what had happened, and the 
woman  whose  child  had  provoked  the  incident  finally  learned 
that  the  other  mother  thought  he  had  not  been  properly  pun-
ished.  She  thereupon  let  it be  known  among her neighbors  that 
the child had in fact been punished on the day of the incident.  In 
a  few  days  the  message  reached  its  intended  destination,  where-
upon  the  mother whose  child  had been hit invited  her neighbor 
and  another,  neutral,  neighbor  to  coffee.  The  coffee-klatsch  re-
solved  the  differences,  but  only  because  the  block's  friendly 
climate had provided for the prior and circuitous communication 
that allowed the one mother to learn that the guilty child had in-
deed  been  punished.  Had  communication  been  poorer,  other 
differences  between the  two neighbors might  have been  invoked 
to increase the conflict.  Indeed, when the block's social climate is 
poor,  the struggle will  be limited  to  the involved  parents, for  no 
one wants to  take sides.  If a  family  becomes  enmeshed  in  battles 
with  a  number of neighbors,  however,  that family is  likely  to  be 
quickly ostracized, regardless of the social climate. 

The  importance  of compatibility is  extended also  to  relation-
ships  that  do  not  involve  children,  and  is  underscored  by  the 
problems encountered by neighbors who differ significantly.  One 
potential  trouble  spot  was  age.  Although  some  elderly  Levit-
towners  were  able  to  assume  quasi-grandparental  roles  toward 
the  street's  children,  others  were  lonely  and  uncomfortable  a-
mong the  young families,  and  enthusiastic gardeners  were  upset 
when  children  romped  over  flowerbeds  and  carefully  tended 
lawns.  The  difficulty  was  exacerbated  by  the  builder's  prohibi-
tion of fences,  a  clause in the deed restriction  that was later vio-
lated on a number of blocks and actually taken to court. 

Class  differences  also  expressed  themselves  in areas  other  than 
child-rearing. 15  Upper  middle  class  women-whose  concept __ of 

•  162  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

after-housework  activity  did  not  include  coffee-klatsching,  con-
versation  about  husbands,  homes,  and  children,  or  gossiping 
about  the  neighbors--rejected  and  were  rejected  by  the  neigh-
bors. So were women who were especially active in organizational 
life.  Perhaps  the  major  problems  were  faced  by  working  class 
people who had been  used  to spending their free  time with rela-
tives  or childhood friends  and found  it hard  to  become  friendly 
with  strangers  (especially  middle  class  ones).  The  change  was 
particularly distressing  to  those  who  had  spent all  their  lives  in 
the neighborhood in which they grew up. If, when they moved to 
Levittown,  they  were  sufficiently  "open"  to  respond  to  friendly 
neighbors and found others of working class  background nearby, 
they  could  adapt;  if  not,  they  were  virtually  isolated  in  their 
houses.  For the  latter,  a  small  minority  to  be  sure,  life  in  Levit-
town  was  hard.18  Ethnic  differences  were  also  a  barrier  between 
neighbors.  Groups without a strong subcommunity were isolated, 
notably  a  handful  of  Japanese,  Chinese,  and  Greek  families. 
Some neighbors came with ethnic and racial  prejudice, and anti-
Semitism,  though  rare,  could  be  justified  by  the  old  charge  of 
Jewish  clannishness 17  and  by  class  differences  resulting  from 
generally higher incomes among Jews.18 

A  final  barrier was  sexual,  and  this affected  the women  whose 
husbands worked  irregular schedules and might be home during 
the day.  A  woman neighbor did not visit  another when  her hus-
band  was  home,  partly because  of  the  belief that  a  husband  has 
first call on his wife's companionship,  partly to prevent suspicion 
that her visit might be interpreted as  a sexual  interest in the hus-
band.  This practice is  strongest among working class  women,  re-
flecting  the traditional class norm that people of the opposite sex 
come  together  only  for  sexual  reasons,  and  becomes  weaker  at 
higher  class  levels;  in  the  upper  middle  class  there  are  enough 
shared  interests  between  men  and  women  to  discourage  suspi-
cion.19  The  sexual  barrier  sometimes  inhibited  neighbor  rela-
tions among women whose  husbands traveled as  salesmen,  pilots, 
or seamen, forcing their wives to associate with each other. 

Couple  Visiting 20 

Although  40  per  cent  of  the  Levittowners  reported  more 
couple  visiting  than  in  their  former  residences,  the  change  was 
not  quite  as  great  as  for  neighboring,  requiring  as  it  does  the 
compatibility of four rather than two and more of a commitment 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  163  • 

toward  friendship  as  well. 21  Like  neighboring,  the  increase  in 
couple  visiting  resulted  principally  from  the  supply  of  compat-
ible  people,  although  it was  also  encouraged  significantly  by  or-
ganizational  activity;  members  of  voluntary  associations  and  of 
the highly organized Jewish subcommunity reported the greatest 
increase. 22  Even  the  people  who  had  not  wanted  to  do  more 
visiting before they moved  to Levittown  found  themselves doing 
more  if  they  were  in  organizations.  Whether  organizational 
membership  encourages  more  visiting or vice  versa  is  not  clear; 
most  likely,  the  same  gregariousness  that  induces  visiting  also 
makes  "joiners,"  for  the  latter  have  more  friends  in  Levittown 
than the unaffiliated. 

Couple visiting is  governed by narrower criteria of compatibil-
ity  than  neighboring,  for  religiously  mixed  marriage  partners 
reported  more  neighboring,  but  found  themselves  doing  less 
couple  visiting  in  Levittown. 28  Older  people  and  people  of 
lower status also reported decreases.  Evidently, friendship choices 
were  affected  by  religion,  and  people  who  straddled  two  had 
trouble finding  friends.  So  did people  who  straddled  the  classes, 
for some Jewish women who had found Jewish organizations not 
to  their liking,  wanting more "cultural" activities  but not being 
quite  up  to  the  civic  programs  of  the  cosmopolitans,  reported 
that their social  life suffered. 

The patterns of couple visiting in Levittown question two  fea-
tures  of  the  suburban  critique-the superficiality  of friendships 
and  social  hyperactivity.  According  to  many  critics  of  suburban 
life,  the  transience  of  the  population  induces  transient relation-
ships which  end with departure  from  the !=Ommunity.  Transient 
relationships  undoubtedly exist;  one Levittowner, who had gone 
back  to  visit  old  friends  in  her  former  community,  returned  to 
report  ttiat  she  no  longer  had  much  in  common with  them  and 
that  they  had  been,  as  she  put  it,  "development friends."  Other 
Transients  established  close  friendships,  however,  and  one  fam-
ily,  temporarily  transferred,  returned  to  the  block  to be close  to 
friends  even  though  they would have preferred to move  into one 
of Levitt's newer houses. 

The criticism of "development" friendship harbors an implicit 
comparison with "bosom" friendship, assumed to have existed in 
the  past,  but there  is  no evidence  that  the comparison  is  empir-
ically  valid.  Close  friendships,  I  suspect,  typically  develop  in 
childhood  and  adolescent  peer  groups,  and  can  continue  in  a 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

static  society  where  people  have  as  much  in  common  in  adult-
hood as  in childhood.  But in American society,  and especially  in 
the middle class;  geographical and social  mobility often separates 
people  who  have  grown  up  together,  so  that  shared  interests 
among childhood friends are rare.  Often, only nostalgia keeps the 
relationship  going.  Many  Levittowners  talk  about  close  friends 
"at home,"  but they see  them  so  rarely  that the current strength 
of  the  friendship  is  never  properly  tested.  Instead,  they  develop 
new  friends  at each  stage  of the life cycle or as  they move up oc-
cupationally and Qevelop  new  social  and leisure  interests.  Close-
ness  is  not  replaced  by superficiality,  but permanent friendships 
give  way  to  new  and  perhaps  shorter ones  of similar closeness.24 
Whether or not this relationship is  desirable depends on one's 
values.  People  today,  particularly  the  middle  classes,  are  more 
gregarious than those of the past.  The working class,  restricted in 
social  skills  or content  to  range  within  a  smaller,  perhaps closer, 
network  of  relatives  and  childhood  friends,  comes  nearest  to re-
taining the  traditional  "bosom" friendship.  But these  people,  in 
my  research  as  in  many  other studies,  report difficulties  in mak-
ing new  friends  as  their life conditions  change. 2~ 

The  critics'  charge  that  suburbanites  indulge  in  hyperactive 
visiting  to counteract boredom.and loneliness brought on by the 
lack of  urbani'ty  in  their  communities is  equally mistaken.  Com-
ing from  academia where the weekend brought parties, and hav-
ing just lived in an Italian working class neighborhood in Boston 
where  people  maintained  an  almost  continual  "open  house,"  I 
was  surprised at how little entertaining took  place among Levit-
towners.26  Although  people  often  had  visitors  on  Sunday  after-
noons, weekend evenings were not differentiated from  the rest, a 
fact  that  should  be  obvious  from  the  high  ratings  of  television 
programs on the air at that time.  I  would guess  that, on the aver-
age,  Levittowners  gathered  informally  not  more  than  two  or 
three  times  a  month and  gave  formal  parties about once a  year, 
not counting those around Christmas and New Year's Eve.  Social 
life  in Levittown was not hyperactive  by any stretch of the imag-
ination,  except  perhaps  in  the  first  few  months  of  putting  out 
feelers.  I  suspect  that  the  critics  either confuse  the  early  hyper-
activity  with  the  normal  pattern  once  life  had  settled  down,  or 
they generalize from observations in upper middle class  suburbs, 
where partying is a major leisure activity. 

Admittedly,  the critics could question  my assumption  that an 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  165  • 

increase  in  social  life  is  equivalent  to  an  improvement  in  its 
quality, and argue  that  it represents  instead an escape  from  per-
vasive  boredom.  If the  Levittowners  had  found  their  social  life 
boring,  however,  they  would  either  have  cut  it  down  or  com-
plained about greater boredom. The data indicate just the oppo-
site,  for  those  visiting more were  less  bored (and vice  versa),  and 
besides,  if  social  life  had  been  as  dull  as  the  critics  claim,  why 
would the interview respondents have been so  enthusiastic about 
the friendliness of their fellow residents? 

THE  PROS  AND  CONS  OF 
POPULATION  HOMOGENEITY 2T 

The suburban critique is  quite emphatic on  the subject of demo-
graphic  homogeneity.  For  one  thing,  homogeneity  violates  the 
American  Dream  of  a  "balanced"  community  where  people  of 
diverse  age,  class,  race,  and  religion  live  together.  Allegedly,  it 
creates dullness  through  sameness.  In addition,  age  homogeneity 
deprives  children-and  adults--of  the  wisdom  of  their  elders, 
while  class,  racial,  and  religious  homogeneity  prevent  children 
from  learning how to live in our pluralistic society.  Homogeneity 
is  said  to make people callous  to  the  poor, intolerant of Negroes, 
and  scornful  of  the  aged.  Finally,  heterogeneity  is  said  to  allow 
upward mobility, encouraging working and lower class  people to 
learn  middle class  ways  from  their more advantaged neighbors. 28 
There is  no question  that  Levittown  is  quite homogeneous  in 
age and income as compared to established cities and small towns, 
but such comparisons are in ~any ways  irrelevant.  People do not 
live in the political  units we call  "cities"  or "small  towns";  often 
their  social  life  takes  place  in  areas  even  smaller  than  a  census 
tract.  Many such  areas  in  the  city  are  about  as  homogeneous  in 
class  as  Levittown, and slum and high-income areas,  whether ur-
ban or suburban,  are  even  more so.  Small  towns  are notoriously 
rigid in  their separation of rich and poor, and  only appear to  be 
more  heterogeneous  because  individual  neighborhoods  are  so 
small. All  these considerations effectively question the belief that 
before  the  advent  of  modern  suburbs  Americans  of  all  classes 
lived  together.  Admittedly, statistics compiled for cities and sub-
urbs as  a  whole show  that residential  segregation  by class and by 
race  are  on  the  increase,  but  these  trends  also  reflect  the  break-

•  166  •  ' 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

down  of rigid class  and caste  systems  in  which  low-status  people 
"knew their  place,"  and which  made residential  segregation  un-
necessary_ 

By ethnic and religious criteria,  Levittown  is much  less  homo-
geneous  than  these  other areas  because  people  move  in  as  indi-
viduals rather than as groups, and the enclaves found  in some re-
cently built urban neighborhoods, where 40 to 6o per cent of the 
population comes from one ethnic or religious group, are absent_ 
Nor  is  Levittown  atypically  homogeneous  in  age;  new  commu-
nities  and  subdivisions  always  attract  young  people,  but  over 
time,  their  populations  "age"  until  the  distribution  resembles 
that of established communities.29 

Finally,  even  class  homogeneity  is  not  as  great  as  community-
wide statistics would  indicate.  Of three  families  earning $7ooo a 
year,  one  might  be  a  skilled  worker  at  the  peak  of  his  earning 
power  and  dependent  on  union  activity  for  further  raises;  an-
other, a white collar worker with some hope for a  higher income; 
and the third, a young executive or professional  at the start of his 
career.  Their  occupational  and  educational  differences  express 
themselves  in many variations in life style, and if they are neigh-
bors, each is  likely to look elsewhere for companionship.  Perhaps 
the  best  way  to  demonstrate  that  Levittown's  homogeneity  is 
more  statistical  than  real  is  to  describe  my  own  nearby  neigh-
bors.  Two  were  Anglo-Saxon  Protestant  couples  from  small 
towns,  the breadwinners employed as  engineers;  one an agnostic 
and  a  golf  buff,  the  other a  skeptical  Methodist  who  wanted  to 
be  a  teacher.  Across  the  backyard  lived  a  Baptist  white  collar 
worker from  Philadelphia and his Polish-American wife, who had 
brought her foreign-born  mother with her  to Levittown;  and an 
Italian-American  tractor operator (whose ambition was  to own a 
junkyard)  and  his  upwardly  mobile  wife,  who  restricted  their 
social  life to a  brother down the street and a host of relatives who 
came  regularly  every  Sunday  in  a  fleet  of  Cadillacs.  One  of my 
next-door  neighbors was  a  religious  fundamentalist  couple from 
the Deep South  whose  life revolved  around the church;  another 
was an equally religious Catholic blue collar worker and his wife, 
he  originally  a  Viennese  Jew,  she  a  rural  Protestant,  who  were 
politically liberal  and as  skeptical about middle class ways as  any 
intellectual. Across  the street,  there was another Polish-American 
couple, highly mobile and conflicted over their obligations to  the 
extended  family;  another  engineer;  and  a  retired  Army  officer. 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

No wonder  Levittowners were puzzled when a  nationally known 
housing expert addressed them on the "pervasive homogeneity of 
suburban life." 

Most  Levittowners were  pleased  with  the diversity  they found 
among  their  neighbors,  primarily  because  regional,  ethnic,  and 
religious  differences  are  today  almost  innocuous  and  provide 
variety  to  spice  the  flow  of  conversation  and  the  exchange  of 
ideas.  For example, my Southern neighbor discovered pizza at the 
home of the Italian-American neighbor and developed a  passion 
for it, and I  learned much about the personal rewards of Catholi-
cism  from  my  Catholic  convert  neighbors.  At  the  same  time, 
however,  Levittowners  wanted  homogeneity  of  age  and  income 
--or rather,  they wanted neighbors and friends with common in-
terests and sufficient consensus of values to make for informal and 
uninhibited  relations.  Their  reasons  were motivated  neither  by 
antidemocratic  feelings  nor  by  an  interest  in  conformity.  Chil-
dren  need  playmates  of  the same  age,  and  because  child-rearing 
problems vary with age,  mothers like to be near women who have 
children of similar age.  And  because  these  problems also  fluctu-
ate  with  class,  they  want  some  similarity  of  that  factor-not 
homogeneity of occupation and education so  much as  agreement 
on  the  ends  and  means  of caring for  child,  husband,  and  home. 
Income similarity is valued by the less affluent, not as an end in 
itself,  but  because  people  who  must  watch  every  penny  cannot 
long  be  comfortable  with  more  affluent  neighbors,  particularly 
when  children come  home  demanding  toys  or clothes  they  have 
seen next door.  Indeed,  objective measures of class are  not  taken 
into account in people's associations at all,  partly because they do 
not  identify  each  other  in  these  terms,  but  also  because  class 
differences  are  not  the  only  criterion  for  association. 30  Some-
times  neighbors  of  different  backgrounds  but  with  similar  tem-
peraments find  themselveS  getting along nicely,  especially  if they 
learn to avoid activities and topics about which they disagree. For 
example,  two  women  of diverse  origins became  good  friends  be-
cause  they were  both  perfectionist housekeepers married to  easy-
going  men,  although  they  once  quarreled  bitterly  over  child-
rearing values. 

But Levittowners also want some  homogeneity for  themselves. 
As  I  noted  before,  cosmopolitans are  impatient with  locals,  and 
vice versa;  women who want to talk about cultural and civic mat-
ters  are  bored  by  conversations  about  home  and  family-and, 

•  168 '. 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

again,  vice  versa;  working class  women  who  are  used  to  the  in· 
formal  flow  of talk with relatives  need to  find  substitutes  among 
neighbors with  similar experience.  Likewise,  young people  have 
little in common with older ones, and unless they want surrogate 
parents,  prefer  to  socialize  with  neighbors and friends  of similar 
age.  Some Levittowners sought ethnic and religious homogeneity 
as  well.  Aside  from  the Jews and  some  of  the  Greeks,  Japanese, 
and  the  foreign-born  women  of  other  nations,  observant  Catho-
lics  and  fundamentalist  Protestants  sought  "their  own,"  the 
former  because  they were  not entirely at ease  with  non-Catholic 
neighbors,  the  latter because  thei•:  time-consuming church activ-
ity  and  their  ascetic  life  styles  set  them  apart  from  most  other 
Levittowners.  They  mixed  with  their  neighbors,  of  course,  but 
their couple visiting was  limited  principally  to  the  like-minded. 
Because of the diversity of ethnic and religious backgrounds,  the 
Philadelphia  sample  was  asked  whether  there  had  been  any 
change in the amount of visiting with people of similar "national 
descent or religious preference";  30  per cent reported a decrease, 
but  20  per  cent  reported  an  increase.31  Those  doing  less  such 
visiting  in  Levittown  also  said  they  were  lonelier  than  in  Phila-
delphia. 

Most  people  had  no  difficulty  finding  the  homogeneity  they 
wanted  in  Levittown.  Affluent  and  well-educated  people  could 
move  into  organizations  or  look  for  friends  all  over  Levittown, 
but older people and people of lower income or poorly educated 
women  were  less  able  to  move  around  either  physically  or  so-
cially.  Women from  these groups often did not have a  car or did 
not  know  how  to  drive;  many were  reluctant  to  use  baby-sitters 
for  their  children,  only  partly  for  financial  reasons.  Hetero-
geneity,  then, may be a mixed blessing, particularly on the block, 
and  something can  be  said  for  class  and age  homogeneity. 

The alleged  costs  of  homogeneity were also  more  unreal  than 
the  critics  claim.  It  is  probably  true  that  Levittowners  had  less 
contact  with  old  people  than  some  urbanites  (now  rather  rare) 
who still live in three-generation households.  It is  doubtful, how-
ever,  that  they  had  les~ contact  with  the  older  generation  than 
urban  and  suburban residents  of  similar age  and  class,  with  the 
exception of the occupational Transients, who are far from  home 
and  may  return  only  once  a  year.  Whether  or  not  this  lack  of 
contact with grandparents affects  children negatively  can  only be 
discovered by systematic studies among them.  My observations of 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  169  • 

children's relations with grandparents suggest that the older gen-
eration is strange to them and vice versa,  less as  a  result of lack of 
contact than of the vastness of generational change. 

This  is  also  more  or  less  true  of adult  relationships  with  the 
older generation. Social change in America has been so  rapid that 
the  ideas  and  experiences  of the  elderly are  often anachronistic, 
especially  so  for  young  mobile  Levittowners  whose  parents  are 
first  or  second  generation  Americans.  Philadelphia  women  who 
lived  with  their  parents  before  they  moved  to  Levittown  com-
plained  at  length  about  the  difficulties  of  raising  children  and 
running a  household  under  those  conditions,  even  though  sorQe 
missed  their  mothers  sorely  after  moving  to  Levittown.  A  few 
found  surrogate  mothers among  friends  or  neighbors,  but chose 
women  only slightly older  than  themselves  and  rarely consulted 
elderly neighbors. As  for  the husbands,  they were,  to a  man, glad 
they had moved away from  parents and in-laws. 

That suburban  homogeneity deprives children of contact with 
urban pluralism and "reality" is also dubious. Critics assume that 
urban  children  experience  heterogeneity,  but  middle  class  par-
ents--and working class  ones,  too--try hard to shield  them  from 
contact with conditions and people of lower status. Upper middle 
class  children may be taken on  tours of the city,  but to museums 
and  shopping  districts  rather  than  to  slums.  Indeed,  slum  chil-
dren, who are freer of parental supervision, probably see  more of 
urban diversity  than anyone else,  although  they do not often  get 
into middle class areas. 

The  homogeneity  of  Levittown  is  not  so  pervasive  that  chil-
dren  are  shielded  from  such  unpleasant  realities  as  alcoholism, 
mental  illness,  family  strife,  sexual  aberration,  or juvenile delin-
quency  which  exist  everywhere.  The  one  element  missing  on 
most  Levittown  blocks--though,  of  course,  in  many  city  neigh-
borhoods too--is the presence of Negro families.  Although young 
Negro  women  came  from  nearby  Burlington  to  work  as  maids, 
there  were  only  two  Negro  families  in  the  three  neighborhoods 
built before Levittown's integration, and about fifty  in the three 
built since then.  Most Levittown children are unlikely to see any 
Negroes  around  them  and  will  not  have  real  contact  with  them 
until  they  enter  junior  high  school.  But  it  is  not  at  all  certain 
that  mere  visual  exposure-to  Negroes  or anyone  else--encour-
ages learning of pluralism and tolerance.  Children pick up many 
of their attitudes from parents and peers, and these are not neces-

•  170  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

sarily  pluralistic.  If visual  exposure  had  the  positive  effects  at-
tributed  to  it,  city  children,  who  see  more  Negroes  than  sub-
urban  children  do,  should  exhibit  greater  racial  tolerance.  In 
reality they do  not;  indeed,  the middle class child growing up in 
a  white  suburb  may  be  more  opposed  to  segregation  than  one 
raised in an integrated city.  This is  not a justification for segrega-
tion,  but a  suggestion that visual exposure is  no sure means to in-
tegration. 

A  generation  of  social  research  has  demonstrated  that J;tcial 
andQtlle.rJorms __ Qf  iml!gr<ltiQn  oc~!-!r when diverse people can in-
teract frequently  in equal and noncompetitive situations.82  Here 
the  suburbs  are  at an  advantage  when  it comes  to religious  and 
ethnic integration, but at a disadvantage for  racial  and class inte-
gration,  for  aside  from  residential  segregation,  suburban  high 
schools  bring  together  students  from  a  narrower variety  of resi-
dential  areas than do urban ones.  Again,  mere  diversity  does not 
assure  the  kind  of interaction  that encourages  integration,  and  a 
school  with  great  diversity  but  sharp  internal  segregation  may 
not be as  desirable as one with less diversity but without internal 
segregation.  Judging by life  on  the block  in Levittown,  maximal 
diversity  and  extreme  heterogeneity  encourage  more  conflict 
than  integration,  and  while  conflict  can  be  desirable  and  even 
didactic, this is only true if it can be resolved in some way.  People 
so different from  each other in age or class that they cannot agree 
on anything are unlikely to derive  much  enrichment from heter-
ogeneity. 

A  corollary of  the  belief in diversity  as  a  stimulant to enrich-
ment  holds  that  working class  and  lower class  people  will  bene-
fit-and  be improved-by living among middle  class  neighbors. 
Even  if one  overlooks  the patronizing class  bias  implicit  in  this 
view,  it is not at all  certain  that residential propinquity will  pro-
duce  the  intended cultural  change.  In  Levittown,  working class 
families  living  alongside  middle  class  ones  went  their  own  way 
most of the time.  For mobile ones, heterogeneity is  obviously de-
sirable,  provided  middle  class  people are  willing  to  teach  them, 
but  nonmobile  ones  will  react  negatively  to  force  feedings  of 
middle class  culture.  Neighbors are  expected  to  treat each  other 
as  equals, and working class  residents have enough difficulty pay-
ing the  higher cost of living among middle class  people,  without 
being viewed as  culturally deprived.  When working class organi-
zations  used  middle class  Levittowners  for  technical  and admin-

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  171  • 

istrative services,  they  rejected  those  who looked  down  on  them 
and constantly  tested  the  others  to  make  sure they  measured up 
to  the  norms  of  working class  culture.  For  example,  at  a  VF\V 
softball  game,  two  middle  class  members  were  razzed  unmerci-
fully  for  their  lack  of  athletic  skill.  Children  are  not  yet  fully 
aware of class,  so  that they can be with  (and learn from)  peers of 
other  classes,  and  there  is  some  evidence  that  in  schools  with  a 
majority  of  middle  class  children,  working  class  children  will 
adopt  the  formers'  standards  of  school  performance,  and  vice 
versa. 83 

By  its  very nature, demographic  homogeneity is  said  to  be  in-
compatible with  democracy,  and advocates  of diversity  have  em-
phasized  that a  democracy requires a  heterogeneous community. 
However,  as  the  description  of  Levittown's  school  and  political 
conflict should  indicate,  bringing people  with different  interests 
together  does  not automatically  result  in  the  use  of  democratic 
procedures.  Instead,  it  causes  conflict,  difficulties  in  decision-
making, and attempts to sidestep democratic norms.  If one group 
is  threatened  by  another's  demands,  intolerance  may  even  in-
crease.  Indeed,  democratic  procedure  is  often  so  fragile  that  it 
falls by the wayside under such stress, causing hysteria on the part 
of residents and the sort of panic on the part of the officials that I 
described. The fact is  that the democratic process probably works 
more smoothly in a homogeneous population. Absence of conflict 
is  of course  a  spurious  goal,  particularly  in  a  pluralistic  society, 
and  cannot  be  used  as  an  argument  for  homogeneity.  On  the 
other hand,  unless  conflict  becomes an end in itself,  heterogene-
ity is not a viable argument for greater democracy. 

CFiticsof thes11b11rbs  also  inveigh against  physical  homogene-
ity aDd  mass-produced  housing.  Like much of the rest of the cri-
tique;  this charge is. a  thinly veiled attack on the culture of work-
ing and  lower  middle class  people,  implying  that mass-produced 
h;)usi~g leads  to  mass-produced  lives.  The critics  seem  to  forget 
that the town houses of the upper class in the nineteenth century 
were  also  physically  homogeneous;  that everyone,  poor and  rich 
alike,  drives  mass-produced,  homogeneous  cars  without damage 
to  their  personalities;  and  that  today,  only  the  rich  can  afford 
custom-built  housing.  I  heard  no  objection  among  the  Levit-
towners  about  the  similarity  of  their  homes,  nor  the  popular 
jokes  about  being  unable  to  locate  one's  own  house. 34  Esthetic 
diversity  is  preferred,  however,  and people  talked about moving 

•  172  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

to  a  custom-built  house  in  the  future when  they  could afford  it. 
Meanwhile,  they made  internal  and external  alterations in their 
Levitt house to reduce sameness and to place a  personal stamp on 
their  property.n 

Block Homogeneity and Community Heterogeneity 

Putting together all  the arguments  for  and against  homogene-
ity suggests  that the optimum solution, at least in communities of 
homeowners  who  are  raising  small  children,  is  selective  homo-
geneity  at  the  block  level  and  heterogeneity  at  the  community 
level.  Whereas  a  mixture  of  population  types,  and  especially  of 
rich and poor,  is  desirable  in the community as  a  whole,  hetero-
geneity  on  the  block  will  not  produce  the  intended  tolerance, 
but  will  lead  to  conflict  that  is  undesirable  because  it  is  essen-
tially insoluble and thus becomes chronic. Selective homogeneity 
on  the  block  will  improve  the  tenor  of  neighbor  relations,  and 
will  thus  make  it  easier-although  not  easy-to  realize  hetero-
geneity at the community level. 

By "block" I  mean  here an area in which  frequent  face-to-face 
relations  take  place,  in  most  cases  a  sub-block  of  perhaps  ten  to 
twelve  houses.  Selective  homogeneity requires  enough  consensus 
among  neighbors  to  prevent  insoluble  conflict,  to  encourage 
positive although  not necessarily  intensive relationships between 
them, and  to make visiting  possible  for  those  who want it in  the 
immediate vicinity.  If Levittown  is  at all  typical,  the crucial  fac-
tors  in  homogeneity  are  age  and  class.  The  range  of  ages  and 
classes  that can  live  together is  not so  limited,  however,  as  to re-
quire tenant selection  programs.  The voluntary selection  pattern 
that  now  occurs  on  the  basis  of  house  price  is  more  than  suffi-
cient, and as  the ghettoization of the poor in public housing sug-
gests,  formal  and  involuntary  selection  has  many  serious  disad-
vantages.  Besides,  it  is  questionable  whether  planners  have  the 
knowledge  to  go  about  planning other  people's  social  relations, 
and even  if they had the knowledge,  it is doubtful  that they have 
the  right  to  do  so. 38  Of course,  selection  through  house  price  is 
also a  form of planning, but since it is  not directly related to ten-
ants' specific characteristics, it leaves  more room for choice. 

The emphasis on  voluntary  selection  also  copes  with  another 
objection  to  homogeneity,  that  it crystallizes  class  divisions  and 
makes people more aware of class differences.  Implicit in this ob-
jection  is  the  assumption  that  awareness  of  class  differences  is 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  173  • 

wrong, and that any attempt to use class as a separating criterion is 
undesirable. This assumption would be defensible if it were part 
of a  larger program  to  eliminate  or at  least reduce  economic  in-
equities,  but it is  generally put forth  by  people  who  are  uncom-
fortable about the existence of classes and want to solve the prob-
lem by avoiding it. 

These  observations  have  a  number  of  implications  for  site 
planning.  Given  the  boundaries within which neighboring takes 
place,  the  significant  social  unit  in  the  community  (at  least,  in 
one  like  Levittown)  is  the  sub-block-which  is  not  a  physical 
unit.  Conversely,  the  neighborhood  of several  hundred  families 
which city planners have traditionally advocated is socially irrele-
vant,  whatever virtues  it may  have  in defining a  catchment area 
for  the  elementary school  or the neighborhood  shopping center. 
In fact,  in order  to maximize community heterogeneity,  it might 
be desirable  to  eliminate  the neighborhood  unit and  plan  for  a 
heterogeneous  array  of  homogeneous  blocks,  each  block  separ-
ated from  the next by enough of a real  or symbolic barrier tore-
assure  those concerned with property values.  This would encour-
age  more  heterogeneity  in  the  elementary  school  and  other 
neighborhood  facilities,  and  would  thus  contribute significantly 
to community heterogeneity.81 

Communities  should  be  heterogeneous  because  they  must  re-
flect  the pluralism of American society. Moreover, as  long as local 
taxation  is  the  main  source  of  funds  for  community  services, 
community  homogeneity  encourages  undesirable  inequalities. 
The  high-income  community  can  build  modern  schools  and 
other  high-quality  facilities;  the  low-income  community,  which 
needs these  facilities  more urgently, lacks  the tax base  to support 
them.  As  a  result,  poor  communities  elect  local  governments 
which  neglect  public  services  and  restrict  the  democratic  pro-
cess  in  the  need  to  keep  taxes  minimal.  Both  financial  inequity 
and its political consequences are eliminated  more  effectively  by 
federal  and state  subsidy  than by community  heterogeneity,  but 
so  long  as  municipal  services  are  financed  locally,  communities 
must include all income groups. 

The criteria on which  the advocacy  of block  homogeneity and 
community  heterogeneity  is  based  cannot  justify  racial  homo-
geneity at either level.  Experience with residential  integration  in 
many communities, including Levittown, indicates that it can  be 
achieved  without  problems  when  the  two  races  are  similar  in 

• 

174  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

socioeconomic level  and  in  the visible cultural  aspects  of class-
provided,  however,  the  whites  are  not  beset  by  status  fears.  In-
deed,  the  major barrier  to  effective  integration  is  fear  of status 
deprivation,  especially  among  white  working class  homeowners. 
The whites  base  their fears  on the stereotype  that nonwhite peo-
ple  are  lower  class,  and  make  a  hasty  exodus  that  reduces  not 
property values but the selling prices that can be obtained by the 
departing  whites.  When  class  differences  between  the  races  are 
great,  the  exodus  is  probably  unavoidable,  but  where  Negroes 
and whites have been of equal status, it can be prevented, at least 
in  middle  class  areas.  Yet  even  if  this  were  not  the  case,  homo-
geneity is only one value among many, and if any person chooses 
to move among  people who differ  in race--or age,  income,  reli-
gion, or any other background characteristic-he has the right to 
do so  and  the right  to governmental  support in his  behalf.  That 
such  a  move  might  wreak  havoc  with  a  block's social  life  or the 
community's consensus  is  of lower priority than  the maintenance 
of such values as  freedom  of choice and equality. The advantages 
of residential  homogeneity  are  not  important  enough  to  justify 
depriving  anyone  of  access  to  housing  and  to  educational  and 
other opportunities. 

CONFORMITY  AND  COMPETITION 

I The suburban critique is  especially strident on the prevalence of 

conformity.  It argues  that  relationships  between  neighbors  and 
friends  are regulated by  the desire  to copy each other to achieve 
uniformity. At the same  time,  the critics also see suburbanites as 
competitive, trying to keep up or down with the Joneses to satisfy 
the  desire  for  status.  Conforming  (or  copying)  and  competing 
are  not  the  same-indeed,  they are  contradictory-but  they  are 
lumped  together  in  the  critique  because  they  are  based  on  the 
common  assumption that,  in the  suburbs,  behavior  and opinion 
are  determined  by  what  the  neighbors  do and  think,  and  indi-
vidualism is  found only in the city.  Both  competition and copy-
ing exist  in  Levittown,  but not for  the  reasons  suggested  by  the 
critics. They are ways of coping with heterogeneity and of retain-
ing  individuality  while  being  part  of  the  group.  They  exist  in 
every  group,  but  are  more  prevalent  among  homeowners  and, 
because of the fascination  with suburbia, more visible  there.  But 
this does not make them suburban phenomena. 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  175  • 

Enough  of  the  suburban critique  has  seeped  into  the reading 
matter of Levittowners to make  "conformity" a  pejorative  term, 
and  interview questions about  it  would  have  produced  only de-
nials. Competition is  talked about in Levittown, however,  and 6o 
per cent of the random sample reported competition among their 
neighbors. 88  The  examples  they  gave,  however,  not  only  in-
cluded copying,  but half the respondents described  it positively. 
"I  don't  know  what  competition  is,"  said  one  man.  "Perhaps 
when we see the neighbors repairing the house, and we figure our 
own repairs would  be  a  good  idea."  Another put it more  enthu-
siastically:  "Friends and neighbors ask me what I've done, and by 
our visiting different  neighbors we  get  different  ideas  about fix-
ing up the house-how we  are going to  paint.  Instead of both of 
us buying an extension ladder, we go half and half." 

In  effect,  diverging  or  deviant  behavior  can  be  seen  as  com-
petition, conformity, or the chance to learn new ideas, depending 
on  the  observer.  One  who  dislikes  behavior  common  to  several 
neighbors may accuse  them of copying each other. 1£  the behavior 
is dissimilar, it must be a result of competition:  "keeping up with 
the  Joneses"  or  "spending  beyond  one's  means."  ·when the  be-
havior  is  approved,  however,  it  is  interpreted  as  sharing  ideas. 
The  observer's  perspective  is  shaped  principally  by  his  relative 
class position, or by his estimate of his  position. If the observer is 
of higher status  than  the  observed,  he  will  interpret  the  latter's 
attempt to share higher-status ideas as competing, and his sharing 
of lower status ways  as  copying. If the observer is  of lower status 
than  the observed,  his ideas will  not be shared,  of course,  but he 
will  consider  the  more  affluent  life  style  of  the  higher-status 
neighbor as  motivated by status-striving or "keeping up with  the 
Joneses." 39  As  one blue collar man  put it,  "There are some who 
act  so  darned  important,  as  if  they  have  so  much,  and  I  can't 
figure  out what  they  are  doing  in  Levittown  when  they  have  so 
much."  Another blue  collar  man  who had  taught  his  neighbors 
about  lawn  care,  and  felt  himself  to  be  their  equal,  was  not 
threatened:  "One  or  two  try  to  keep  up  with  the  Joneses,  but 
generally  people are  not worried.  If one gets ahead and  another 
copies him, we  laugh. Our attitude is,  all the more power to him. 
Wher.  we  can  afford  it,  we  make  improvements  too."  In  other 
words,  when  the  observer  feels  he  is  equal  to  the  observed,  he 
will  see  competing  and  copying  either as  sharing  or as  friendly 
games.  And  socially  mobile  people  tend  to  judge  the  ways  of 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

higher-status  people  positively,  for  they can  look  to  their  neigh-
bors  for  guidance  about  how  to  live  in  the  suburbs.  "Everyone 
has  fixed  up  their  houses,  but  not  to  compete,"  a  former  city 
dweller  reported.  "At  first  none  of  us  had  anything  and  maybe 
you saw what others did and you copied it." Needless to say,  those 
who are  being copied  may consider  the  mobile neighbor a  com-
peting upstart. 

Status-striving  is  generally  ascribed  to  people  with  more 
money,  more  education,  and  a  different  life  style  by  those  who 
cannot afford the style or prefer a different one. The same motive 
is  inferred about social  relations.  Cliques  of higher-status  people 
are seen by lower-status observers as  groups that coalesce for pres-
tige  reasons,  and  lower-status cliques are viewed  by  higher-status 
observers  as  groups  that  come  together  to  conform.  When  rela-
tions  among neighbors of unequal  status deteriorate,  the  higher-
status  person  explains  it  in  terms  of  culturally or morally  unde-
sirable actions  by  the lower-status neighbor;  the lower-status  per-
son  ascribes  the  break  to  his  neighbor's  desire  to  be  with  more 
prestigious  people.  In  reality,  instances  of  overt  status-striving, 
carried  out  to  show  up the  lower  status  of  neighbors,  are  rare. 
"Keeping up"  takes  place,  but  mainly  out  of  the  need  to  main-
tain  self-respect,  to  "put the  best face  forward"  or not to be con-
sidered  inferior and  "fall  behind."  Serious  status-striving  is  usu-
ally a  desperate attempt by a  socially  isolated neighbor to salvage 
self-respect through material or symbolic displays of status, and is 
dismissed or scorned.  One such neighbor was described as  "trying 
to  be  the  Joneses,  and  hoping  people  will  follow  him,  but  we 
don't pay any attention to him." Indeed, the social  control norms 
of  block  life  encourage  "keeping  down  with  the  Joneses,"  and 
criticize  display  of  unusual  affluence,  so  that  people  who  can 
afford  a  higher  standard  of living than  the rest  and  who show  it 
publically are unpopular and are sometimes ostracized.40 

Conforming and copying occur more frequently  than competi-
tion,  mostly  to  secure  the proper appearance of  the  block  to im-
press  strangers.  A  pervasive  system  of social  control  develops  to 
enforce standards of appearance on the block, mainly concerning 
lawn  care.41  Copying  and  some  competition  take  place  in  this 
process,  but  neither  the  Levittowners  nor  the  suburban  critics 
would describe it in these terms.  Everyone knows  it is  social  con-
trol  and  accepts  the  need  for  it,  although  one  year  some  of my 
neighbors and I wished we could pave our front lawns with green 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  1.77  • 

concrete  to  eliminate  the  endless  watering  and  mowing  and  to 
forestall criticism of poor lawns. 

The primary technique for social control is  humor. Wisecracks 
are  made  to  show  up deviant  behavior,  and  overt  criticism  sur-
faces  only when  the  message  behind  the  wisecracks  does  not get 
across.  Humor  is  used  to  keep  relations  friendly  and  because 
people feel  that demands for  conformity are  not entirely proper; 
they  realize  that  such  demands  sometimes  require  a  difficult 
compromise  between  individual  and  group  standards.  When  it 
comes  to  lawn  care,  however,  most  people  either  have  no  hard-
and-fast personal standards, or they value friendly relations more. 
Since the block norms and the compromises they require are usu-
ally worked out soon after the block is  occupied-when everyone 
is striving to prove he will be a good neighbor-they are taken for 
granted by the time the block has settled down. 

The demand for compromise is  also reduced by limiting block 
standards to the exterior appearance of the front of the house and 
the  front  yard,  the  back  being less  visible  to  outsiders.  Interiors, 
which  involve  the  owner's  ego  more,  are  not  subjected  to  criti-
cism.  People are  praised  for  a  nice-looking  home,  but  there are 
no wisecracks  about deviant taste in furnishings-at  least,  not  to 
the  owner.  The  same  limitation  holds  for  cars  and  other  con-
sumer goods  purchased.  Although  I  drove  a  1952  Chevrolet,  by 
far  the oldest car on the block,  no one ever joked with me about 
it, 42  but Levittowners who  used  trucks  in  their work and  parked 
them  on  their  streets  at  night,  giving  the  block  the  image  of  a 
working class  district,  were criticized  by  middle  class  neighbors. 
The criticism was  made  behind  their  backs,  however,  because  it 
affected  the  neighbors'  source  of  livelihood.  In  this  case,  as  in 
some others, social  control was  passed on to the township govern-
ment,  and  eventually,  it  voted  an  ordinance  prohibiting  truck-
parking on residential streets. 

What  people  do  inside  their  houses  is  considered  their  own 
affair,  but  loud  parties,  drunkenness,  and  any  other  noticeable 
activities  that  would  give  the  block  a  bad  reputation  are  criti-
cized.  So  are' parents who let their children run loose  at all  hours 
of  the  evening,  not  only  because  they  publicly violate  norms  of 
good parenthood, but also because they make it harder for neigh-
bors  to  put  their own children  to  bed.  Private  deviant behavior 
is,  of course, gossiped about with gusto, but only when it becomes 
visible, and repeatedly so,  is  gossip translated into overt criticism. 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Even visible deviance  that affects block appearance is  tolerated if 
it is  minor and if the individual  believes firmly  in what he is  do-
ing.  One  Levittowner  decided  that  he  would  buy  a  wooden 
screen  door,  rather  than  the  popular but more  expensive alumi-
num one.  He decided, however, to maintain  block uniformity by 
painting it with aluminum color.  "People will  think I'm cheap," 
he  told me, "but I  don't mind that. I  know  I'm thrifty." I  do not 
know what people thought, but he was  not criticized. 

Copying also  takes  place  without  being  impelled  by conform-
ity, and then becomes a group phenomenon that occurs in spurts. 
When  one  neighbor  builds a  patio or repaints  his  house,  others 
are likely to follow his  lead, but not automatically. On my block, 
for  instance, one homeowner repainted  his  house  in  1959  but no 
one  imitated  him.  When  another  began  to  do  it  the  next  year, 
however,  a rash of repainting occurred. If this had been simply a 
copying  phenomenon,  the  painting should  have  started  in  1959, 
especially since the first  painter was a  popular community leader. 
What happened  in  1g6o  is  easi1y  explained.  By  that time,  houses 
built in  1958  needed repainting, and when one man, who had an 
early  vacation,  devoted  his  two  weeks  to  it,  other  men  followed 
his  example when they went on vacation. 43 

People  also  buy  household  items  and plants  they  have  seen  at 
their neighbors',  but only when  the item is  either widely desired 
or  clearly  useful.  For  example,  early  in  Levittown's  history,  a 
rumor  spread  that  the  willow  trees  the  builder  had  planted 
would  eventually  root  into  and  crack  the  sewer  pipes,  and  one 
man  promptly  took  out his  tree.  Neighbors who were  friends  of 
his followed suit, but others refused to accept the rumor and kept 
their  trees.  On  my  block,  the  rumor was  initiated  by  a  Catholic 
leader, and within a week,  the Catholics had  taken out their wil-
low  trees,  but the  others had  not followed  suit.  My own  innova-
tion, inexpensive bamboo shades to keep out the blazing sun, was 
not  copied;  people  said  they  looked  good,  but  no  one  imitated 
me. 

COMPETITION, CONFORMITY,  AND  HETEROGENEITY 

Both competition and conformity are ways  of coping with  heter-
ogeneity,  principally  of  class.  \Vhen  lower-status  people  are  ac-
cused  of  copying  and  higher-status  ones  of  living  beyond  their 
means  to  impress  the  neighbors,  disapproval  is  put  in  terms  of 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

•  179  • 

negative motives  rather  than  class  differences,  for  accusations  of 
deviant behavior which  blame individuals make it more difficult 
for  the  deviant  to  appeal  to  his  group  norms.  Such  accusations 
also  enable  people  to  ignore  the  existence  of  class  differences. 
Class  is  a  taboo subject, and the taboo is  so  pervasive,  and so  un-
conscious, that people rarely think in class terms. 

Competition and conformity exist  also  because  people are de-
pendent on  their neighbors.  In working class  or ethnic enclaves, 
where social life is concentrated among relatives, their criticism is 
feared more than the neighbors'.  Upper middle class people, hav-
ing  less  to  do  with  neighbors,  conform  most  closely  to  the  de-
mands of their friends.  In Levittown, neighbors are an important 
reference  group,  not only  for  lower  middle  class  people  but for 
working class ones cui off from relatives.  Even so,  the prime cause 
of  both competition and conformity is  home  ownership and  the 
mutual need to  preserve property and status values.  Only  11  per 
cent of former renters but 70  per cent of former  homeowners re-
ported  noticing competition  in  their former  residence,  but both 
observed  it equally  in  Levittown.  Moreover,  whether  they came 
from  urban or suburban neighborhoods,  they reported  no  more 
competition  in  Levittown  than  in  the  former  residence.  Conse-
quently, competition  is  not distinctive  either  to Levittown  or to 
the suburbs. 

What,  then,  accounts  for  the  critics'  preoccupation  with  sub-
urban conformity, and their tendency to see status competition as 
a dominant theme in suburban life? For one thing, many of these 
critics live in city apartments, where  the concern for  block status 
preservation is minimal. Also,  they are largely upper middle class 
professionals,  dedicated  to  cosmopolitan  values  and  urban  life 
and disdainful  of the local  and antiurban values of lower middle 
class  and  working  class  people.  Believing  in  the  universality  of 
these  values,  the  critics  refuse  to  acknowledge  the  existence  of 
lower middle  class  or working class  ways  of living.  Instead,  they 
describe people as  mindless conformers who would be cosmopoli-
tans  if  they were  not weak and allowed  themselves  to  be swayed 
by builders, the mass  media, and  their neighbors. 

The ascription  of  competitive  behavior  to  the  suburbs  stems 
from another source. The upper middle class world, stressing as  it 
does individuality, is  a  highly competitive one. In typically upper 
middle class  occupations  such  as  advertising,  publishing,  univer-
sity  teaching,  Jaw,  and  the  arts,  individual  achievement  is  the 

•  180  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

main key  to  success,  status,  and security. The upper middle class 
is  for  this  reason  more  competitive  and  more  status-conscious 
than  the  other  classes.  Popular  writers  studying  upper  middle 
class  suburbs have observed  this competition and some  have mis-
takenly ascribed it to suburbia, rather than to the criteria for suc-
cess  in  the  professions  held  by  these  particular  suburbanites.44 
Those  writing  about  lower-status  suburbs  have  either  drawn 
their  information  from  upper  middle  class  friends  who  have 
moved  to  lower  middle  class  suburbs  for  financial  reasons  and 
found  themselves a dissatisfied minority, or they have, like upper 
middle  class  people  generally,  viewed  the  lower-status  people 
about  whom  they  were  writing  as  trying  to  compete  with  their 
betters. 

Finally,  the new suburbs,  being more visible  than other lower 
middle  and  working  class  residential  areas,  have  become  news-
worthy, and during the 1950s they replaced "mass culture" as  the 
s_c~pegoat and  most  convenient  target  fpr  the  fear  and  distaste 
that upper middle class people feel  for  the rest of the population. 
Affluent  suburbs have  bec-ome false  targets of dissatisfaction with 
the  upper  middle  class's  own  status-consciousness  and  competi-
tion,  the  "rat-race"  i~  experiences  in  career  and  social  striving 
having been projected on life beyond the city limits. 

The inaccuracy of the critique does not, of course,  exclude the 
possibility  that  conforming  and  competing  are  undesirable  or 
dangerous,  or  that  too  much  of  both  take  place  in  Levittown.  I 
do not believe either to be the case.  If one distinguishes between 
wanted  conformity,  as  when  neighbors  learn  from  each  other or 
s_h<!_re  ideas;  tolerated  conformity,  when  they  adjust  their  own 
standards  in  order  to  maintain friendly  relations;  and unwanted 
conformity,  when  they  bow  to  pressure  and  give  up  their  indi-
viduality, only the last is clearly undesirable, and in Levittown it 
is  rare.  Tolerated  conformity requires  some  surrender  of auton-
omy,  but I can see why  Levittowners feel  it  is  more important to 
be friendly  with one's neighbors  than to insist  on individual but 
unpopular  ways  of  fixing  up  the  outside  of  the  house.  The 
amount of copying and conformity  is  hardly  excessive,  consider-
ing  the  heterogeneity  on  the  block.  Indeed,  given  the  random 
way  in which  Levittowners become neighbors,  it  is  amazing  that 
neighbor  relations  were  so  friendly  and  tolerant  of  individual 
differences.  Of course,  the working class  and  upper middle  class 
minorities experience pressure for unwanted conformity, but the 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

• 

IBl  .• 

latter can get  away  from  the  block for  social  activities,  and  ulti-
mately, only some of the former suffer.  Ironically,  their exposure 
to  pressures  for  conformity  is  a  result  of  the  heterogeneity  that 
the critics want to increase even further. 

NOTES 

1.  These charges  can  be  found,  for  example,  in  Henderson,  Allen, 

Keats,  and  Whyte  (•956),  Chaps.  25,  26. 

2.  Neighboring, or visiting with  neighbors,  was  defined  in  the inter· 
view  as  "having  coffee  together,  spending  evenings  together,  or 
frequent conversations in or out of the house;  anything more than 
saying hello or p~lite chatting about the weather."  lt was  further 
defined  as  taking  place  among  individuals  rather  than  couples, 
and  people  were  asked,  "Are  you,  yourself,  doing  more  visiting 
with  neighbors  than  where  you  lived  before,  or Jess?" 

3·  Fifty-four  per cent  of  the  random  sample  was  neighboring  more 
than in  the previous residence;  16  per cent,  less;  and  30  per cent, 
the  same.  Among  Philadelphians,  the  percentages  were  48,  19, 
and  33· respectively. 

4·  Thus, one  third of the least educated  in  the random sample,  and 
two  thirds  of the college-educated in  the Philadelphia  sample  re· 
ported less neighboring. Jews from smaller towns who had already 
learned  to  live  with  non-Jewish  neighbors,  and  third  generation 
Jewish  Philadelphians did not report less  neighboring. 

5·  The  principal  post-World  War  II  studies  are  Merton  (1947a); 
Caplow and Foreman;  Festinger,  Schachter,  and  llack;  Festinger; 
Dean  (1953);  Haeberle;  Blake-et al.;  Whyte (1956),  Chap.  25;  and 
Willmott  (1963),  Chap.  7·  Critical  analyses  of  these  studies  can 
be  found  in  Gans  (1961a),  pp.  135-137  and  Schorr,  Chap.  1;  of 
earlier ones,  in  Rosow. 

6.  Similar observations were reported in English new  towns by  Hole, 
pp.  164-167, and Willmott (1962),  pp.  124-126. See  also  Willmott 
(1963),  PP· 74-82. 

7·  The  initial  report  on  this  phenomenon  was  by  Whyte  (1956), 

8.  On  narrower  blocks,  there  was  more  interaction  between  back-

Chap. 25. 

yard neighbors, however. 

9·  Among Cape Cod owners,  22  per cent visited most  often with  the 
right- and lef't-hand neighbor, and 43  per cent, with the across-the-
street  neighbor.  Among  the  ranch  owners,  the  percentages  were 
46,  23,  and 23,  respectively;  and among the Colonial ones,  30,  35, 
30.  The remaining visits were with yet other neighbors across  the 
street  or  backyard. 

10.  If the location of the kitchen window had been significant, women 

•  182  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

in  Cape  Cod  houses  should  have  visited  most  often  across  the 
street, and 50 per cent did, as compared to 17 and 25 per cent with 
the  right- and  left-hand  neighbor,  respectively.  Those  in  ranch 
houses should have visited most with  the right-hand and backyard 
neighbors,  but none  chose  the  former,  17  per cent  the  latter,  33 
per  cent  the  left-hand  neighbor,  and 50  per  cent  the  one  across 
the street.  Those in Colonial houses  should  also  have chosen  the 
backyard  neighbor,  but  only  11  per  cent  did;  44  per  cent  pre-
ferred  the right-hand one, and  22  per cent each  the left-hand and 
the across-the-street  neighbor. 

11.  Thirty-one per cent said  more  than  two favorite  couples lived  on 
their street, and the remaining 38 per cent, less  than two. As  might 
be  expected,  college-educated  respondents  chose  even  fewer 
friends from  their own street.  Using street addresses actually over-
stated  the  role  of  propinquity,  for  not  all  people  on  the  same 
street--especially if it was  a  long one-are neighbors,  and several 
first  met such  couples in church or in  a  club.  A  study of an  Irish 
new town reported 31  per cent of the best friends,~ere neighbors, 
See  Field  and Desmond,  p.  54· 

12.  Southworth. 
13.  This relationship varies with age,  of course, and older children do 
not  choose  propinquitous  playmates  as  often.  Olsen's  study  of 
children's  birthday  parties  reported  in  the  Levittown  newspaper 
showed  that  among  three-year-olds,  guests  came  from  a  median 
distance  of  364  feet;  775  feet  among  four-year-olds,  1130  feet 
among  seven-year-olds.  The  distance  then  remained  fairly  stable 
until  it rose  to  about  2000  feet  among  twelve- and  thirteen-year-
olds. 

14.  A  study  of  newcomers  in  an  old  suburb  suggests  that  teenagers 
may  even  react  to  class  conflict  that  is  limited  to  parents.  "If a 
family  is  scapegoated,  the  youngsters  will  soon  turn  up  in  some 
mischief or as  delinquents."  Thoma and Lindemann,  p.  193. 
15.  Class conflicts  among neighbors in  Levittown,  New  York,  are  de-
scribed by Dobriner (1963),  pp.  107-108;  in English  new  towns  by 
Young  and  Willmott,  Chap.  10,  and  by  Willmott  (1963).  p.  114. 
16.  The social  isolation of suburban working class women and better-
educated ones  with  distinctive  tastes  is  also  reported  by  Gutman, 
pp.  174,  181-182. See  also  Haeberle,  Chap.  7· 

17.  Although only 20  per cent of the random sample reported cliques 

on  their blocks,  all were Jewish ones, with one exception. 

18.  Jews  often  move  into  communities  where  the  median  income  is 
lower than th1eir own, partly because some prefer to spend a lower 
share  of  their  income on  housing,  partly  because  they  fear  rejec-
tion from non-Jewish neighbors of similar income and education. 
19.  The  sexual  overtones  did  not  affect  my  interviewing,  because 
strangers were exempt. Women are permitted to have latent sexual 
interest  in  casual  encounters-giving  rise  to  jokes  about  the  ice-
man and the milkman-and only neighbors'  husbands are  taboo. 

Social  Life:  Homogeneity  and  Conformity 

20.  People  were  asked  about  "the  visiting  you  and  your  husband 
(wife)  do with other couples, either among neighbors or anywhere 
else  in  Levittown. 

21.  Forty-four  per cent  of  the 1·andom sample  reported  more  couple 
visiting;  21  per cent,  less;  and 35  per cent,  no change.  Among the 
Philadelphians,  the percentages were almost the same:  39· 22,  and 
39,  respectively.  In  a  new  working class  suburb,  38  per  cent  said 
"they entertain friends. at home"  more  often  than  before,  but  27 
per cent  reported  less.  See  Berger  (196o),  p.  65. 

22.  Fifty per cent of  organizational members and  27  per cent of non-
members reported more couple visiting. So  did 83  per cent of the 
Jews in the random sample,  and 53  per cent in the city sample, as 
compared  to  go  per cent and  17  per cent of  the Protestants.  The 
association  between  visiting  and  organizational  activity  was  also 
found in Levittown,  Pennsylvania by Jahoda et al.,  p.  107. 

23.  Among  Philadelphians  of  mixed  marriage,  only  20  per  cent  re-
ported  an  increase,  and  6o  per  cent  a  decrease  in  couple  visiting 
after leaving the city. Sixteen per cent in both samples were inter-
marriages,  usually  of Catholics with  Protestants. 

24.  Sec,  e.g.,  Whyte  (1956),  <:;hap.  21. 
25.  Low-status respondents have as  many friends as  middle- and high-
status  ones,  but  the  former  do  less  couple  visiting  than  in  the 
previous residence. 

26.  The neighbors  I  knew  best  in  the West  End of Boston  had open 
house  every  Tuesday  night,  visited  the  open  house  of  relatives 
every Friday night, and visited with yet other relatives and friends 
on Sundays. 

27.  Much  of  this  section  is  taken  from  Gans  (1961b). 
28.  For  an  incisive  critique  of  the  balanced  community  ideal,  see 

Orlans,  pp.  88-94. 

29.  For  a  description  of  this  trend  in  the  first  Levittown,  see  LieU 

(1963).  See  also  Willmott  (1963),  p.  23. 

go.  For similar findings  in Fairless  Hills,  Pennsylvania,  see  Haeberle, 

P· 75· 

31.  Forty-four per cent  said  they had done  "much" visiting with  eth-
nic or religious peers in Philadelphia, and 52  per cent, "some." In 
Levittown,  the  percentages  shifted  slightly,  to  37  and  66,  respec-
tively.  Respondents  were  free  to  define  what  they  considered 
"much" or "some." Jews and low-status people reported  the  most 
ethnic-religious visiting;  Irish Catholics,  the greatest increase after 
moving  to  Levittown. 

32.  See,  e.g.,  Williams,  pp.  437-447· 
33·  See,  e.g.,  Wilson,,but  also  the study  by  Sewell  and  Armer  which 
questioned the impact of "neighborhood context" on educational 
aspirations.  Of course,  in school  students are  a  captive  audience, 
and  school  contacts  among  working  and  middle  class  students 
may  evaporate  after  school  hours. 

M·  A  study  of a  Scottish  new  town  reported  that  "only  one-fifth  of 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

the tenants said  they would prefer more variety and intermixture 
of house-types, while two-fifths regarded the row of identical build-
ings  as  a  desirable  feature,"  and  that  "a  house  which  is  one  of 
many in a  street can become personalized without much aid from 
the architect." See  Hole,  p.  169. 

35·  It  is  illuminating  to  compare  the  early  popular  writing  about 
Levittown,  New York,  to  more  recent  reports.  Initially,  the  Long 
Island community was  widely described (and decried)  as a hideous 
example  of  mass-produced  housing  which  would  soon  turn  into 
a  slum;  twenty  years  later,  journalists  report  the  diversity  pro-
duced  by  the  alteration  of houses,  and  the  charm created  by  the 
maturing of trees and shrubbery-and, of course,  the demand for 
the houses,  which now sell for about twice  their original price. 

36.  Orlans,  pp. 95-104, and Whyte (1956),  pp.  348-349. 
37·  A  similar  solution  has  been  proposed  in  England  by  Willmott 

(1963),  pp. 117-u8. See also Dean (1958). 

38.  People were  asked,  "What kind of competition have  you  noticed 
between the neighbors about such  things as  getting things for  the 
house, fixing up the yard, or repainting the house?" 

39·  Forty-four per cent of the blue collar respondents reported "keep-
ing up with the Joneses"  among their neighbors,  but only  31  per 
cent of the white collar and professional ones did so.  In an English 
working  class  new  town,  26  per  cent  made  similar  complaints, 
principally lower-income people about those with higher incomes. 
Willmott (1963),  p.  98. 

40.  Whyte (1956),  Chap. 24. 
41.  Meyersohn  and  Jackson,  p.  281. 
42.  In fact,  I was more often praised for having taken good care of the 
car,  for my  thrift, and for  my  good luck in possessing a  better car 
than the more recent models. 

43·  Copying took place only when someone decided to paint his house 
another color. Since this violated a deed-restriction, people waited 
for  someone  to  break  the  rules  and  then  followed  suit quickly-
but they did not copy the initiator's color scheme. 

44·  See,  e.g.,  Spectorsky. 

D 

Chapter Nine 

D 

THE  VITALITY  OF 

COMMUNITY  CULTURE 

D 

D 

LEADING  WITH  THEIR  ASSUMPTION  OF  HOMOGENEITY  AND  CONFORM-
ity,  many critics see  the culture of communities like  Levittown-
those  features  transcending  social  life-as  marked  by  sameness, 
dullness, and blandness. The image of sameness derives from  the 
mass-produced housing,  and also from  the  prevalence of a nation-
al and equally mass-produced culture of consumer goods ~hich is 
extended  to  characterize  the  consumers  themselves.  Part  of  the 
critique  is  tinged  with  political  fear  that  the  national  culture 
and  the  deleterious  effects  of  conformity  may  sap  the  strength 
of local  organizations,  which  will  in  turn  break  down  the  com-
munity social  structures that  act as  barriers between  the  individ-
ual and  the state.  According  to  theorists  of the  mass  society,  the 
individual  then becomes submissive and subject to demagoguery 
that  can  incite  mass  hysteria  and  mob  action,  destroying  the 
checks  and balances  of a  democratic  society.  This hypothesis,  de-
veloped  originally  by  Ortega  y  Gasset,  the  Spanish  conservative 
philosopher  who  feared  popular  democracy,  gained  prominence 
during  the  1930s  when  Hitler  and  Stalin  systematically  elimi-
nated  local  organizations  to  forestall  opposition  to  their  plans. 
In America, this analysis has flowered  with  the increasing central-
ization  of  the  federal  government,  but  suburbia  is  considered 
particularly susceptible to  the dangers of mass  society because of 
the  rootlessness  and  absence  of  community  strength  supposedly 
induced  by  the  large  number  of  Transients.1  Other  observers, 

•  zBs  • 

•  186  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

less fearful  of mass society, stress and blandness of suburban life, 
which,  they  fear,  is  producing  dull  and  apathetic  individuals.2 
T~ese charges  are  serious and,  if accurate,  would  suggest  that 
suburbia is  a danger to American democracy and culture. Most of 
them,  however,  are  either  inaccurate  or, when  accurate,  without 
\\the  negative consequences attributed  to  them.  Levittown  is  very 
much  a  local  community;  if  anything,  it  neglects  its  ties  to  the 
I larger society more than it should.  It is  not rootless,  even with its 
1,Transients, and  it  is  not dull, except to its teenagers.  The critics' 
'conclusions stem in part from  the previously mentioned class and 
cultural  differences  between  them  and  the  suburbanites.  What 
they see as  blandness and apathy is  really a  result of the invisibil-
ity  and  home-centeredness  of  lower  middle  class  culture,  and 
what they consider dullness derives  from  their cosmopolitan stan-
dard for judging communities, which condemns  those  lacking ur-
ban  facilities--ranging  from  museums  to  ethnic  districts--that 
are favored by the upper mi~dle class. 

They  also  look  at  suburbia  as  outsiders,  who  approach  the 
community with a  "tourist" perspective. The tourist wants visual 
interest, cultural diversity,  entertainment, esthetic  pleasure, vari-
ety  (preferably  exotic),  and  emotional  stimulation.  The  resi-
dent,  on  the  other  hand,  wants  a  comfortable,  convenient,  and 
socially satisfying  place  to  live-esthetically pleasing,  to  be sure, 
but first and foremost functional  for his daily needs.  Much of the 
critique of suburbia as community reflects  the critics' disappoint· 
ment that  the new suburbs do not satisfy  their particular tourist 
requirements;  that  they are  not  places  for  wandering,  that  they 
lack  the  charm  of  a  medieval  village,  the  excitement  of  a  me· 
tropolis,  or the architectural  variety of an  upper-income  suburb. 
Even  so,  tourism  cuts  across  all  classes.  A  neighbor,  returning 
from  a  trip  to  Niagara  Falls,  complained  bitterly  about  com-
mercialization,  using  much  the  same  language  as  the  critics  do 
about  suburbia.  What  he  felt  about  the  Falls,  however,  he  did 
not  feel  about  Levittown. 

We are  all  tourists  at  one  time  or another,  but most  commu-
nities  can  serve  both  tourist  and  residential  functions  only with 
difficulty.  For  example,  rhe  crowding  and  nightlife  that  attract 
the  tourist  to  Greenwich  Village  make  it uncomfortable  for  the 
resident.  Although the tourist perspective is  understandable, and 
even  justifiable,  it  is  not  by  itself  a  proper criterion for  evaluat-
ing a  community,  especially  a  purely residential  one  like  Levit-

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

town.  It must  be judged  first  by  the  quality  of  community  life 
and culture it offers  its residents;  the needs of the tourist are sec-
ondary. 

mE NATIONAL  CULTURE  AND  mE COMMUNITY 

To  the outside observer,  Levittown  appears  to  be  a  community 
on  which  the  national  American  culture  has  been  imprinted  so 
totally as  to leave  little room  for  local  individuality.  The houses 
express  the  current  national  residential  style:  pseudo-Colonial 
fronts  borrowed  from  the  eighteenth century glued on a  variety 
of  single-family  house  styles  developed  between  the  eighteenth 
and  twentieth  centuries,  and hiding twentieth century interiors. 
Schools are contemporary, modular, one-story buildings that look 
like all  other new schools.  The shopping center is  typical  too, al-
though the interior is  more tastefully designed  than most. It con-
sists mainly of branches of large national chains, whose  inventory 
is  dominated by prepackaged national  brands, and the small cen-
ters are  no different.  The old "Mom and  Pop" grocery  has  been 
replaced  by  the  "7  to  11"  chain,  which,  as  its  name  indicates, 
opens  early  and  closes  late,  but sells  only  prepackaged  goods  so 
that each store can be serviced by a single cashier-clerk.  Even the 
Jewish and Italian foods  sold  at the  "delis" are cut from  the loaf 
of a  "pan-ethnic" culture that is now nationally distributed. 

A  large,  partially preplanned residential development must al-
most inevitably depend on national organizations, since these are 
the  only  ones  that  can  afford  the  initial  capital  investment  and 
the unprofitable hiatus  before  the community is  large  enough to 
support  them  properly.  This  is  as  true  of stores  in a  new  shop-
ping  center-which  sometimes  wait  years  before  they  show  a 
profit-as it is  of churches and voluntary organizations.  In addi-
tion,  Levittown  itself  is  in  some  ways  a  national  brand,  for  the 
size  of  Levitt's  operation  in  an  industry  of  small  entrepreneurs 
has  made  his  communities  a  national  symbol  of  low-price  sub-
urbia. This has helped to attract national organizations, as  well as 
Transients  who  work  for  large  national  corporations.  When 
they  move  into  a  new  metropolitan  area,  they  usually  do  not 
know where to find  housing,  and having heard of Levittown, are 
likely  to  look  there  first.  The  brand  name  "Levittown"  makes 
the  housing  more  trustworthy  than  a  small  subdivision  con-
structed  by  an unknown  local  builder. 

•  188  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Although  Levittown  would  thus  seem  to  be,  as  much  as  any 
community in America,  an  example of Big Culture,  this  is  only 
superficially  true,  for  the  quality  of  life  in  Levittown  retains  a 
strictly  local  and  often  antinational  flavor,  exploiting  national 
bodies and resources for strictly local  purposes whenever possible. 
To  the  visitor,  the  Levittown  houses  may  look  like  all  other 
pseudo-Colonial ones in South Jersey,  but Levittowners can cata-
log  the  features  that  distinguish  their  houses  from  those  in 
nearby  subdivisions.  The  stores  may  be  chains  selling  brand-
name  goods,  but  the  managers  become  involved  in  local  activ-
ities  and  enable  local  groups  to  hold  bazaars  and  other  fund-
raising  affairs,  including  bakesales  which  compete  with  store 
merchandise.  The same  patterns obtain in voluntary associations 
and churches.  For  example,  the  Boy  Scouts  are  run  by an  intri-
cate national  bureaucracy which sets  detailed rules for  the activ-
ities of local  troops.  Since the organization must attract children, 
however,  what actually goes  on at  troop  meetings  bears little re-
semblance to the rules, and the less  the national office  knows,  the 
better for  it and the troop leader. 

The  priority  of  local  concerns  is  even  more  emphatic  in  gov-
ernment,  for  federal  agencies  and  national  party  headquarters 
are  viewed  mainly  as  sources of funds  and  power  to  be used  for 
local  needs.  A  civil  defense  agency was  set  up  in  Levittown,  not 
to  satisfy  national  regulations,  but  because  the  county  civil  de-
fense  director was  running for  political  office.  The national  pro-
gram  provided  him  an  opportunity  to  distribute  some  funds  to 
local communities, which in turn enhanced his political fortunes. 
Federal  funds  which  came  to  Levittown  for  civil  defense  were 
used for local  police and fire  needs as  much as  possible within the 
limits  of  the  law.  Similarly,  when  the  Township  Committee  in 
1g6o  invited  both  Nixon  and  Kennedy  to  campaign  in  Levit-
town,  its  purpose  was  not  to  support  the  national  candidates of 
the two parties but to gain publicity for Levittown. 

Many  Levittowners  work  in  branch  offices  or  factories  of  na-
tional corporations, and their reports about their work and their 
employers  suggest  that  national  directives  are  often  viewed  as 
outlandish  and  unreasonable,  to  be  sabotaged  in  favor  of  local 
priorities.  However  much  a  national  corporation  may  give  the 
appearance of a well-run and thoroughly centralized monolith, in 
actual  fact  it  is  often a  shaky aggregate of local  baronies. The re-
sult  is  considerable  skepticism  among  Levittowners  about  the 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

•  189  • 

effectiveness  and  power  of  national  corporations,  a  skepticism 
easily extended to all national agencies. 

Generally speaking,  Levittowners do not take much interest in 
the  national  society,  and  rarely  even  see  its  influence  on  their 
lives. As long as they are employed, healthy, and able to achieve a 
reasonable  proportion of their personal  goals,  they have no  need 
for  the  federal  government  or  any  other  national  agency,  and 
being locals,  they do not concern themselves with  the world out-
side  their community. Indeed, they  might  better  be  described as 
sublocals,  for  they  are  home-oriented  rather  than  community· 
oriented. Although the lower middle class is sometimes said to re· 
ject bigness,  the  Levittowners do not share  this  feeling.  They do 
not scorn  big supermarkets and national  brands as do the critics, 
and although  they do not see  the  big society  very  clearly,  it ap· 
pears to them as  an  inept octopus  which  can  only cope  with  the 
community through force or bribery. It is opposed not because of 
its  size,  but  because  it is  an  outsider.  When  a  national  service 
club  organized  a  branch  in  Levittown,  one  of  the  Levittowners 
said,  "They are  big and  they  can  help  us,  but we  don't  have  to 
follow  national  policy . . . .  National  headquarters  is  only  a 
racket  that  takes  your  money."  The cultural  orientation  toward 
localism  is  supported  by  more  pressing  sociological  factors;  if a 
local  branch of a  national association  is  to succeed,  it must adapt 
itself to local  priorities in order to attract members, and national 
headquarters must be opposed if it refuses  to go along.  The most 
disliked  outsider  is  not  the  national  society,  however,  but  the 
cosmopolitan with  his  "Brookline values." 

All  this does not, of course,  imply that the national society and 
culture  are  powerless  in  Levittown.  When  industrial  giants  set 
administered  prices  for  consumer  goods  sold  in  the  local  shop-
ping center,  or when  Detroit  engineers  the  annual  style  change 
in its automobiles,  the individual  purchaser can  only express  his 
discontent by refusal  to buy, and when it comes to necessities,  he 
lacks  even  that  choice.  In  Levittown,  however,  the  discontent 
and  the  lack  of  choice  are  minimized,  for  most  people  have 
enough  money  to  pay  administered  prices  and  enough  freedom 
to  choose  among  products.  In  fact,  they  find  themselves  well 
served  by  the  corporations  who  sell  them  their  housing,  food, 
furnishings,  and  transportation.  However,  Levittowners  are  less 
concerned  with  "consumption"  than  the  critics.  They  care  less 
about the  things  they buy and are less  interested in  asserting in-

•  190  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNEBS 

dividuality through consumer behavior,  for  they do not use  con· 
sumption  to  express  class  values  as  much  as  the  upper  middle 
class does.  They may not like mass-produced bread as well  as  the 
local  bakery product they perhaps ate  in childhood,  but they do 
not make· an  issue  of  it,  and  do  not feel  themselves  to  be  mass 
men simply  because  they  buy a  mass-produced  item.  Goods  are 
just not important enough.  Only when  they become tourists are 
they "materialistic"-and traditional.  One of my neighbors who 
was  once  stationed  in Japan  was  not at all  concerned  about  the 
national  prepackaged  brands  sold  in  Levittown,  but  talked  fre-
quently about the commercialization of Japanese culture and the 
unattractive goods he found in the souvenir shops. 

The Mass  Media 

For Levittowners,  probably the most enduring-and c~rtainly 
the most frequent-tie to the national culture is through the mass 
media. Yet even  this is filtered  through a  variety of personal  pre-
dispositions  so  that not many messages  reach  the receiver  intact. 
Few  people  are  dominated  by  the  mass  media;  they  provide 
escape  from  boredom,  fill  up brief  intervals,  and  (perhaps  most 
important)  occupy  the  children  while  the  adults  go  about  their 
business. 

The  most  frequently  used  mass  medium  is  television,  with 
newspapers,  magazines,  and  paperback  novels  following  in  that 
order. In working class homes in Levittown as  elsewhere,  the TV 
set is  likely to be on all  the time, even when company comes,  for 
as  one  Levittowner explained,  "If conversation  lags,  people can 
watch  or it gives  you  something  to  talk  about."  This statement 
suggests  more  the  fears  that  working  class  people  have  about 
their  social  skills  than  their  practice,  for  conversation  does  not 
often lag, at least among friends. 

Middle  class  people,  surer of  their social  skills,  use  television 
more  selectively.  The  children  watch  when  they  have  come  in 
from  play;  after they are  put to bed the adults may  tum on the 
set,  for  television  fills  the  hours  between  g  P.M.  and  bedtime, 
when there is not enough of a block of time for other activities. A 
few  favorite  programs  may  get  rapt attention,  but I  doubt  that 
television supplanted conversation among either middle or work-
ing  class  Levittowners.  There  is  no  indication  that  television-
viewing  increased  after  people  moved  to  Levittown,  for  no one 
mentioned it when  interviewed  about  changes  in  spare-time  ac-

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

•  191 

• 

tivities.  I  suspect  that  viewing had  actually decreased  somewhat, 
at least  during the  time of my study,  when gardening was  still a 
time-consuming novelty for many people. 

Television viewing is  also a  much less  passive activity  than the 
critics  of  the  mass  media  suspect.3  Routine  serials  and situation 
comedies  evoke  little  response,  although  Levittowners  are  sensi-
tive  to  anachronisms  in  the  plots  and  skeptical  of  advertising 
claims. 4  Dramatic  programs  may  provoke  spirited-and  quite 
personal-reactions. For example, one evening my neighbors and 
I  watched an hour-long drama which depicted the tragic career of 
an  introverted  girl  who  wanted desperately  to  become a  serious 
actress  but  was  forced  to  work  as  a  rock-and-roll  dancer,  and 
finally  decided  to  give  up  show  business.  One  neighbor  missed 
the tragedy altogether,  and  thought the girl  should  have  kept on 
trying  to  become  an  actress.  The other  neighbor  fastened  on-
and  approved  of-the ending  (in  which  the  actress  returned  to 
her husband and  to  the family  restaurant in which she  had been 
"discovered")  and  wondered,  rightly,  whether  it was  possible  to 
go back to a  mundane life after the glamor of the entertainment 
world. 

People  do  not  necessarily  know  what  they  want  from  the 
media, but they know what they do not want and trust their abil-
ity to choose correctly. A discussion of television critics one night 
revealed  that  Levittowners  read  their  judgments,  but  do  not 
necessarily accept  them.  "The critics  see  so  much  that  they can-
not  give  us  much  advice,"  said  one.  "They are  too  different  in 
their interests from the audience, and cannot be reviewers for it," 
said another. 

Forty per cent of  the  people  interviewed  said  they  were  read-
ing  new  magazines  since  moving  to  Levittown;  general-interest 
periodicals--Life, Look, Reader's Digest, Time, and the Saturday 
Evening Post-led the list. Only g of the 52 magazines were house-
and-garden  types such as American HO"me  and Better Homes and 
Gardens, but then 88  per cent of the people were already reading 
these, at least in the year they moved  to Levittown. Although not 
a single person said these magazines had helped in the decision to 
buy  a  home  in  Levittown,  57  per  cent  reported  that  they  had 
gotten  ideas  from  the  magazines  to  try  out  in  their  houses,  pri-
marily  on  the  use  of  space,  furniture,  and  shrubbery  arrange-
ments,  what  to  do  about  pictures and drapes,  and  how  to  build 
shelves  and  patios.  The  magazines  provided  help  on  functional 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

rather than esthetic problems of fixing  up the new house.  People 
rarely  copied  something  directly  from  the  magazines,  however. 
Most  often,  their  reading  gave  them  ideas  which  they  then 
altered for their own use,  sometimes after talking them over with 
the neighbors. Similarly, people who adopted new furniture styles 
after moving to Levittown got their inspiration from  their neigh· 
bors rather than  from magazines, although all who changed styles 
(but  only  53  per  cent  who  did  not)  said  they  had  obtained 
some  hints  for  the  house  from  the  home  and  garden  magazines. 
The  media  also  provide  "ideas"  for  community activities,  but 
these  are  altered  by  local  considerations  and  priorities.  For  ex-
ample,  a  few  days after the  Nixon-Kennedy  television  debates in 
1g6o,  candidates for  township offices  were asked  to  participate in 
a similar debate  in  Levittown.  Everyone liked the  idea, but after 
a  fe·w  innocuous  questions  by  out-of-town  reporters,  the  debate 
turned into the traditional candidates' night, in which politicians 
from  both  parties baited  their opponents from  the audience with 
prepared  questions.  Sometimes,  local  organizations  put  on  ver-
sions  of  TV  quiz  games,  and  honored  retiring  officers  with  a 
"This Is  Your Life"  presentation.  A  few  clubs,  especially Jewish 
ones,  held  "beatnik"  parties,  but  since  most  Levittowners  had 
never  seen  a  beatnik,  the  inspiration  for  their  costumes  came 
from  the mass media. 

The  impact  of  the  media  is  most  apparent  among  children: 
they are easily  impressed  by television commercials, and mothers 
must  often  fight  off  their  demands  on  shopping  trips.  But  the 
adults  are  seldom  touched  deeply;  media  content  is  always  sec-
ondary to more  personal  experience.  For example,  people  talked 
about  articles  on  child-rearing  they  had  seen  in  popular  maga-
zines,  but  treated  them  as  topics  of  conversation  rather  than  as 
possible guides for  their own behavior. A  neighbor who had read 
that "permissive" child-rearing was  going out of style after thirty 
years  had  never  even  hearcl  of  it  before,  even  though  she  had 
gone to college.  I  remember discussing Cuba with another neigh-
bor,  an  Air  Force  officer,  shortly after  Castro confiscated  Ameri-
can property there. Although he had been telling me endless and 
angr~·  stories  about  being  exploited  by  his  superiors  and  about 
corruption among high-ranking officers,  he could not see  the sim-
ilarity between his position and that of the Cuban peasant under 
Batista,  and  argued  strenuously  that  Castro  should  be  over· 
thrown. His opinions reflected those of  the media,  but their con· 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

• 

198  • 

tent  did  not  interest  him  enough  to  relate  it  to  his  own  experi-
ences.  He did,  however,  feel  that Castro  had  insulted  the United 
States-and him personally-and the media helped him belong to 
the national  society in  this way.  Indeed,  the media are a  message 
from  that  society,  which,  like  all  others,  remains  separate  from 
the  more  immediate  realities  of self,  family,  home,  and  friends. 
These  messages  really  touch  only  the  people  who  feel  isolated 
from  local  groups  or  who,  like  the  cosmopolitans,  pay  close  at-
tention to the printed word and the screen image. 

Levittown  and  the  Mass  Society 

The  Levittowners'  local  orientation  will  not  prevent  them 
from  becoming  submissive  tools  of  totalitarian  demagogues  if, 
according  to  the  critics  of  mass  society,  the  community  is  too 
weak  to  defy  the  power  of  the  state.  Social  scientists  concerned 
about  the  danger  of  dictatorship  have  often  claimed,  with  De 
Toqueville,  that  the  voluntary  association  is  the  prime  bulwark 
against  it.  For  example,  Wilensky  writes:  "In  the  absence  of 
effective mediating ties,  of meaningful  participation in voluntary 
associations, the population becomes vulnerable to mass behavior, 
more  susceptible  to  personality  appeals  in  politics,  more  ready 
for  the  demagogues  who  exploit  fanatical  faiths  of  nation  and 
race." G 

If Wilensky  is  correct,  Levittowners should be  invulnerable to 
mass  behavior,  for  they  have  started  about  a  hundred  voluntary 
associations  and 73  per cent of the two  interview  samples  belong 
to  at  least  one.  Levittown  should  also  be  more  immune  than 
other communities,  for  about  half of  both  interview  samples  re-
ported  more  organizational  participation  than  in  the  former 
residence. 6  The  way  they  participate,  however,  has  little  conse-
quence  for  their relation  to  the national  society.  The handful  of 
leaders  and  really  active  people  become  familiar  with  the  me-
chanics  of  organizational  and  municipal  politics,  but  the  rank-
and-file  members,  coming  to  meetings  mainly  for  social  and ser-
vice  reasons,  are  rarely  involved  in  these  matters.  Yet  not  even 
the  active  participants  are  exposed  to  national  issues  and  ques-
tions, and they learn little about the ways of coping with the ma-
nipulatory  techniques  feared  by  the critics  of mass  society. 

Nor  does  participation  necessarily  provide  democratic  experi-
ence.  Organizations  with  active  membership  are  likely  to  have 
democratic politics, but when the membership is passive,  they are 

•  194  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

often run by an  individual or a  clique and there is  little demand 
for  democratic  procedure.  Nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  volun-
tary  association  would,  however,  preclude  mob  behavior  and 
mass  hysteria  when  the  members demand  it.  The ad  hoc  groups 
that arose during the school  budget fight and in the controversies 
over liquor, nonresident doctors, and fluoridation,  often acted  in 
near-hysterical  ways.  Admittedly,  these  were  temporary organiza-
tions;  permanent ones,  conscious  of their  image,  are more likely 
to  refrain  from  such  behavior  and,  like  political  parties,  often 
avoid taking stands on controversial issues.  They do  inhibit mob 
action--or,  rather,  they refuse  to  be associated with  it,  forcing it 
into temporary organizations. Yet  if the majority of a  permanent 
group's  membership  is  angry  about  an  issue,  it can  act  out  that 
anger  and  even  put  its  organizational  strength  behind  hysteria. 
At  the  time of racial  integration,  a sizeable  faction  in  one  of  the 
men's  groups  was  contemplating  quasi-violent  protest,  and  was 
restrained  as  much  by  pressure  from  the  churches,  the  builder, 
and  some  government  officials  as  by  cooler  heads  within  the 
group. 

Mob action and mass  hysteria are usually produced by intense 
clashes  of  interest between  citizens and  government  agencies,  es-
pecially  if  government  is  not  responsive  to citizens'  demands.  If 
an  issue  is  especially  threatening  and  other  avenues  for  coping 
with  it  are  blocked,  irrational  action  is  often  the  only  solution. 
Under  such  conditions,  voluntary  associations  can  do  little  to 
quell  it,  partly  because  they  have  no  direct  role  in  the  govern-
ment,  but  mainly  because  their  impact  on  their  membership  is, 
in  Wilensky's  terms,  not  meaningful  enough  to divert  members 
from affiliating with violent protest groups.  Even national officers 
of voluntary associations  can rarely control  irrational actions  by 
local  branches,  especially since  these  rarely come  to  "national's" 
attention. 

The other relationships of the individual  Levittowner vis-a-vis 
the national  society  are so  indirect  that  it would be hard to pin-
point where  and  how  the  two  confront each  other.  It would  be 
harder still  to convince the average Levittowner, locally oriented 
as  he  is,  to  change  his  stance.  Unlike  the  aristocrat  or  the  intel-
lectual,  who  was  once  able as  an  individual  to  influence  the na-
tional  society  and  still  attempts to do  so,  the Levittowners come 
from a  tradition-and from  ancestors-too poor or too European 
even  to  conceive  the  possibility  that  they  could  affect  their  na-

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

•  195  • 

tion.  And  unlike  the  cosmopolitans  of  today,  they  have  not  yet 
learned that they ought to try.  As a result,  the Levittowner is  not 
likely  to act  unless and  until  national  issues  impinge directly on 
his  life.  When  this  does  happen,  he  is  as  frustrated  as  the  cos-
mopolitan about how  to be effective.  All  he can really do is  voice 
his opinion at the ballot box, write letters to his congressman, or 
join  protest  groups.  In  times  of  crisis,  none  of  these  can  change 
the  situation  quickly  enough,  and  this  of  course  exacerbates 
threat,  hysteria,  and  the  urge  toward  mob  action  or  scapegoat-
ing. 

The  national  society  and  the  state  have  not  impinged  neg-
atively  on  the  average  Levittowner,  however;  indeed,  they  have 
served  him  well,  making  him  generally  content  with  the  status 
quo.  The  Congress  is  dominated  by  the  localistic  and  other 
values  of  the  white lower middle  and  working class  population, 
and  since  the goods  and  services  provided  by  the  influential  na-
tional corporations are designed largely for  people like the  Levit-
towners,  they  have  little  reason  to  question  corporate  behavior. 
The  considerable  similarity  of  interests  between  Levittowners 
and  the  nationally powerful  agencies,  private and  public,  makes 
it  unnecessary  for  the  Levittowners  to  concern  themselves  with 
the  national  society  or  to  delude  themselves  about  the  sov-
ereignty  of  the local  community.7 

What  appears  as  apathy  to  the  critics  of suburban  life  is  sat-
isfaction with the way  things are going, and what is  interpreted as 
a  "retreat" into localism and familism is  just ahistorical  thinking. 
Most  lower  middle  and  working  class  people  have  always  been 
localistic  and  familistic;  even  during the  Depression they  joined 
unions  only  when  personal  economic  difficulties  gave  them  no 
other alternative,  becoming inactive  once  these  were  resolved  or 
when it was clear that political activity was  fruitless. 8  Indeed, the 
alleged retreat is  actually an advance,  for  the  present generation, 
especially  among  working  class  people,  is  less  isolated  from  the 
larger society than its parents, less suspicious, and more willing to 
believe  that  it  can  participate  in  the community and  the  larger 
society.  The belief is fragile  and rarely exercised,  but people  like 
the  Levittowners  confront  the  national  society  more  rationally 
than  their  ancestors  did,  and  if  the  signs  of  progress  are  few, 
progress  has  nevertheless  taken  place.  Whether  there  has  been 
enough  progress  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  dictatorship  in  a 
severe  national  crisis  is  hard  to  tell,  but  certainly  the  Levit-

•  196  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

towners  and  their  community  fit  few  of  the  prerequisites  that 
would make  them willing tools of totalitarian leaders  today. 

TRANSIENCE  AND  ROOTLESSNESS 

Part  of  the  fear  of  mass  society  theorists  and  suburban  cnucs 
alike is  the  transience of the new suburban communities and the 
feelings of rootlessness  that allegedly result. About 20  per cent of 
Levittown's  first  purchasers  were  Transients,  who  knew  even 
when  they  came  that  their  employers--national  corporations  or 
the armed services-would require them to move elsewhere some 
years  hence. Their impermanency is  reflected in residential  turn-
over figures  which showed that in  1964,  10  percent of the houses 
were resold and another 5  per cent rented, and that annual  tum-
over was  likely to reach  20  per cent in the future. 9  Not all  houses 
chllnge  hands  that  often,  of  course;  a  small  proportion  are 
sold  and rented over and  over again. 10  Much  of  the  initial  tum-
over  resulted  from  job  transfers--55  per cent  in  1g6o,  with  an-
other 10 per cent from job changes. 11 

'Whether or not the  15  per cent turnover figure  is  "normal"  is 
difficult  to say.  National estimates of mobility suggest that 20  per 
cent  of  the  population  moves  annually,  but  this  figure  includes 
renters.  Levittown's rate is  probably high  in comparison  to older 
communities  of  home  owners,  fairly  typical  of newer  ones,  and 
low  in  comparison  to apartment areas. 12  Conventional  standards 
of "normal" turnover are so old and communities like Levittown 
still  so  new on  the American scene  that  it is  impossible  to deter-
mine a normal turnover rate. Indeed, the need to judge turnover 
stems from  the  assumption  that it is  undesirable;  once  there are 
sufficient  data  to  test  this  assumption,  the  concept  of  normal 
turnover can perhaps be dismissed. 

The  crucial  element  in  turnover  is  not  its  extent  but  the 
change  in  population  composition  and  its  consequences.  If the 
departing  Transients and  Mobiles are replaced  by Settlers,  then 
turnover will of course be reduced. Early in the 1g6os, the second 
buyers were,  however, also Transients, who needed a  house more 
quickly  than  the  builder  could  supply  it,  as  well  as  people  of 
lower income  (probably Settlers)  who could  not afford  the down 
payment on a new house. If more of the latter come to Levittown 
over the years,  the proportion of lower-status  people  in the com-
munity will  increase,  and there may be fears  of status loss among 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

•  197  • 

those of higher status. Although such  fears  were  rare  during  my 
time in the community, they existed on a  few  blocks and may ac· 
count in  part for  the strong reactions  to  status-depriving govern-
mental actions that I described earlier. 

Despite  the  belief  that  Transients  do  not  participate  in  com-
munity life,  in Levittown  they belonged to community organiza. 
tions  in considerably larger numbers than Settlers did,  partly be-
cause  of  their  higher  status.U  More  of  them  also  reported  in-
creased  participation  after  moving  to  Levittown  than  did  Set-
tlers.14  They  were,  however,  likely  to  list  fewer  people  with 
whom  they  visited  frequently. 16  Their  organizational  activity  is 
not  surprising,  for  being  used  to  transience,  they  are  socially 
quite  stable,  usually  gravitating  to  the  same  kinds  of  commu-
nities  and  joining  the  same  kinds  of  organizations  in  them.  In 
fact,  their mobility has  provided  them  with  more organizational 
experience  than  other Levittowners have,  enabling them  to help 
found several groups in the community. 

It has often been charged that modern transience and mobility. 
deprive  people  of  "roots."  Because  of the botanical  analogy,  the 
social  conception  of  the  word  is  difficult  to  define,  but  it  gener-
ally refers  to a  variety of stable roles and relationships which are 
recognized  by  other  residents.  Traditionally,  these  roles  were 
often  defined  by  one's  ancestors  as  well.  Such  roots  are  hard  to 
maintain today and few  people can resist the  temptation of social 
or occupational mobility that requires a physical move.  This does 
not  mean,  however,  that  the  feeling  of  rootedness  has  disap-
peared.  One  way  in  which  Transients  maintain  it is  to  preserve 
the  term  "home"  for  the  place  in  which  they  grew  up.  \Vhen 
Levittowners  talk  of  "going  home,"  they  mean  trips  to  visit 
parents.  People whose parents have  left  the community in  which 
they  grew  up may,  however,  feel  homeless.  I  remember a  discus-
sion with a  Levittowner who explained that he was  going "home 
to  Ohio"  to  visit  his  mother,  and  his  wife  said  somewhat  sadly, 
"My  parents no  longer live  where  I  grew  up,  and  I  never  lived 
with them where they live now. So  I  have only Sudberry Street in 
Levittown;  I  have  no  other  home."  Because  they  were  Tran-
sients, she could  not think of Levittown as  home and, like many 
others,  looked  forward  to  the  day  when  her  husband's  occupa-
tional  transience  would  come  to  an  end  and  they  would  settle 
down. 

Such Transients obviously lack roots in an objective sense and 

•  lg8  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

may also have feelings of rootlessness.  My impression is  that these 
feelings are not intense or frequent.  One way they are coped with 
is  by  moving  to  similar  communities and  putting down  tempo-
rary  roots;  another,  by  joining organizations made  up  of  fellow 
Transients.16  Professionals  who are  transient  often  develop roots 
in  their profession  and its social  groups.  As  Melvin  Webber and 
others  have  argued,  occupational  or  functional  roots  are  replac-
ing spatial roots for  an ever increasing proportion of the  popula-
tion.n This kind of rootedness is  easier for men to establish  than 
for women, and wives,  especially the wives of professionals, often 
suffer  more  from  transience  than  their  husbands.  Some  become 
attached to national voluntary associations-as men in nonprofes-
sional  occupations  do--and  develop  roots  within  them.  This  is 
not entirely satisfactory,  however,  for it provides  feelings  of root-
edness in only a single role, whereas spatial rootedness cuts across 
all  roles,  and  rewards  one  for  what  one  is  rather  than  for  what 
one does. 

New  communities  like  Levittown  make  it  possible  for  resi-
dents,  even  Transients, to  put down roots almost at once.  People 
active in organizations become known quickly;  thus they are able 
to  feel  part  of  the  community.  Despite  Levittown's  size,  shop-
keepers  and  local  officials  get  to know  people  they  see  regularly, 
offering  the  feeling  of being recognized  to  many.  The ministers 
take  special  care  to  extend  such  recognition,  and  the  churches 
appoint  themselves  to  provide  roots-and deliberately,  for  it at-
tracts  people  to  the  church.  Protestant  denominations sought to 
define  themselves  as  small-town  churches  with  Colonial  style 
buildings  because  these  have  been  endowed  with  an  image  of 
rootedness. 

Intergenerational rootedness  is  seldom found  today in any sub-
urban  or urban  community--or,  for  that  matter,  in most  small 
towns-for  it requires  the  kind  of economic  stability  (and  even 
stagnancy)  characteristic  only  of  depressed  areas  of  the  country. 
Moreover,  the  romanticizing  of  this  type  of  rootedness  ignores 
the  fact  that  for  many people  it blocked  progress,  especially  for 
low-status persons who were, by reason of residence and ancestry, 
permanently defined  as  "shiftless"  or  "good for  nothing."  Roots 
can st£angle growth as well as encourage it. 

Transience  and  mobility  are  something  new  in  middle  class 
American  life,  and  like  other  innovations,  they  have  been 
greeted  by  predictions  of  undesirable  consequences,  on  family 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

•  199  • 

life,  school  performance,  and  mental  health,  for  example.  Inter· 
views  with  school  officials,  doctors,  and  policemen  indicated, 
however,  that Transients appeared no more often as  patients and 
police  or  school  problems  and  delinquents  than  other  Levit-
towners.  Transience  can  create  problems,  but  it  has  different 
e_f!ects  for d~lferent people.  For young men, a  transfer usually in-
cludes  a  promotion  or a  raise;  for  older  ones  it  may  mean  only 
another physical  move or a  transfer  to a corporate "Siberia." If a 
Transient is  attached  to  his  home,  but  is  asked  to  move  by  his 
company, he can say  "no" only once or twice  before being asked 
to  resign  or  face  relegation  to  the  list  of  those  who  will  not  be 
promoted  further.  The  move  from  one  place  to  another  is  a 
pleasure  for  few  families,  but  the  emotional  costs  can  easily  be 
overestimated. 18  Because  Transients  move  to  and  from  similar 
types  of  communities,  they  have  little  difficulty  adapting  them-
selves  to  their  new  homes.  In  large  corporations,  they  generally 
receive  advice  about  where  to  look  for  housing,  often  going  to 
areas  already settled  by colleagues who help them make  the resi-
dential transition. 

Frequent moving  usually  hurts  other  family  members  more 
than  the  breadwinner.  Wives  who  had  made  good  friends  in 
Levittown  were  especially  sad  to  go,  and  adolescents  object 
strenuously to  leaving their peers,  so  that parents generally  try  to 
settle  down  before  their  children  enter  high  school.  For  wives 
and  adolescents  transience  is  essentially  an  involuntary  move, 
which,  like  the  forced  relocation  of slum  dwellers  under  urban 
renewal,  may result  in  depression  and other deleterious effects. 19 
Transience  may  also  engender  difficulties  when  problems  of 
social  mobility antedate  or accompany it,  as  in  the case  of older 
corporate  employees  who  must  transfer  without  promotion,  or 
suburbanites  who  move  as  a  result  of  downward  or  extremely 
rapid upward social  mobility. 20  Studies among children of Army 
personnel,  who  move  more  often  than  corporation  Transients, 
have  found  that  geographical  mobility  per  se  did  not  result  in 
emotional  disturbance,21  except  among  children  whose  fathers 
had risen  from  working  class  origins  to  become  officers.22 

These  findings  would  suggest  that  transience  has  its  most 
serious effects  on  people with  identity problems.  The individual 
who lacks a fairly firm sense of his identity will have difficulties in 
coping with  the  new  experiences  he  encounters  in  moving.  He 
will  also  suffer  most  severely  from  rootlessness,  for  he  will  be 

•  200  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

hindered  in  developing  the  relationships  and  reference  groups 
that  strengthen  one's  identity.  This  might  explain  why  adoles-
cents  find  moving so  difficult.  Transients  without  roots  in  their 
community  of  origin  or  their  jobs  must  rely  on  their  family 
members  in  moments  of  stress.  Sometimes,  the  family  becomes 
more cohesive  as  a  result,  but since  stresses  on  one  family  mem-
ber are likely  to affect  all  others,  the family  is  not always  a relia-
ble  source  of support.  I£  identity  problems  are  also  present,  the 
individual  may  have  no  place  to  turn,  and  then  transience  can 
produce  the  anomie  that  critics  have  found  rampant  in  the 
suburbs. But such people are a  small minority in Levittown. 

THE  VITALITY OF LEVITIOWN:  THE ADULT  VIEW 

When  the  Levittowners  were  asked  whether  they  considered 
their community dull, just 20 per cent of the random sample said 
yes,  and  of  Philadelphians  (who  might  have  been  expected  to 
find  it dull  after  living  in a  big  city),  only  14  per cent.23  Many 
respondents were surprised at the very question, for  they thought 
there was  a  great deal  to do  in  the  community,  and all  that was 
needed  was  a  desire  to  participate.  "It's  up  to  you,"  was  a  com-
mon  reaction.  "I£ a  person  is  not  the  friendly  type  or  does  not 
become active, it's their own fault."  "I don't think it's dull here," 
explained  another,  "there  are  so  many  organizations  to  join." 
Some  people  noted  that  Levittown  was  short  of  urban  amuse-
ments,  but  it  did  not  bother  them.  A  former  Philadelphian 
pointed  out:  "If Levittown  is  compared  to  city  living,  there  are 
no  taverns  or  teenage  hangout  places.  Then  it  is  dull.  But  we 
never had any of this in our own neighborhood and it's even bet-
ter  here . . . .  We  are  perfectly  content  here,  I'm  afraid.  Social 
life  is  enough  for  us;  we  are  becoming  fuddy-duddy."  Nostalgia 
for  urban  places was  not  common;  most  people  felt  like  the one 
who  said,  "We  like  quiet  things  . . .  visiting,  sitting  out  front 
in  summer,  having  people  dropping  by."  And  if  Levittown 
seemed  quiet  to  some,  it  did  not  to  others.  "This  is  the  wildest 
place  I've  ever  been.  Every weekend  a  party,  barbecues,  picnics, 
and  things  like  that.  I  really  enjoy  it." 24  The  only  people  who 
thought  Levittown  was  indeed  dull  were  the  socially  isolated, 
and upper middle class people who had tasted  the town's organi-
zational life and found it wanting. 

Wl!_'!_t Levittowners  who  enjoy  their  community  are  saying 

• 

•  201 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 
i~ t~at ~hey find vitalityin other people and organizational activi-
ties;  the community  is  less  important.  That community  may  be 
dull  by  conventional  standards  (which  define  vitality  by  urban 
social  mixture and cultural  riches)  but Levittowners  reject  these 
standards;  they  do  not want  or  need  that  kind  of vitality  or ex-
citement.  Mothers get  their share of it from  the daily adventures 
of  their children  and  the  men  get  it at work.  The  threshold  for 
excitement  is  low,  and  for  many,  excitement  is  identified  with 
conflict,  crisis,  and  deprivation.  Most  L~vittowners grew  up  in 
the  Depression,  and  remembering  the  hard  times  of  their child-
hood,  they  want  to  protect  themselves  and  their  children  from 
stress. 

_b.p~tl1er difference  in values  between critics and Levittowners 
~at play here.  The Italians who lived in  the center city working 
class  neighborhood  I  studied  before  Levittown  were  bored  by 
"the country"-in which  they  included  the suburbs-and so  are 
critics  of  suburbia,  albeit  for  different  reasons.  Many  working 
class  city dwellers  enjoy street  life and  urban  eating or drinking 
places;  upper  middle  class  critics  like  crowds  and  cosmopolitan-
ism.  The lower  middle  class and  the kinds  of  working class  peo-
ple that came to Levittown had no interest in  either. Even  previ-
ous urbanites  had  made little  if  any use  of  the  cultural  facilities 
valued  by  the  cosmopolitan,  and  had  no  need  for  them  in  the 
suburbs.  And  as  the  struggles  over  the  liquor issue  suggest,  they 
want  none  of  the  vitality  sought  by  th~ working  class  urbanite, 
for  they  are  just  escaping  corner  bars  and  the  disadvantages  of 
aging  urban areas.  What  they do want  is  a  kind of interpersonal 
vitality along  with  privacy  and  peace  and  quiet. 23  Vicarious  ex-
citement 
is  something  else  again.  Television  provides  pro-
grammed  and  highly  predictable  excitement,  but  it can  get  bor-
ing.  A  fire  or  accident,  a  fight  at  a  municipal  or  school  board 
meeting,  and  marital  strife  or  minor  misbehavior among  neigh-
bors  involve  real  people  and  known  ones.  The excitement  they 
provide  is  also  vicarious,  but  it  is  not  programmed and  is  there-
fore  more rewarding. 

The Blandness of Lower Middle Class Culture 

_Levittown's criteria for  vitality may spell  dullness  to  the critic 
and  the  visitor,  partly because  much of community life  is  invisi-
kle.  Lower  middle  class  life  does  not  take  place ·either  on  the 
street or in meetings and parties;  it is  home-centered and private. 

•  202  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Once  one  penetrates  behind  the door,  however,  as  does  the  par-
ticipant-observer,  people  emerge  as  personalities  and  few  are 
either dull  or bland.  But when all  is  said and done, something is 
different:  less  exuberance  than  is  found  in  the  working  class,  a 
more  provincial  outlook  than  in  the  upper  middle  class,  and  a 
somewhat  greater  concern  with  respectability  than  in  either.  In 
part,  this  is  a  function  of  religious  background:  being  largely 
Protestant,  the lower middle class  is  still  affected  by  the  Puritan 
ethos.  It lacks  the regular opportunity for  confession  that allows 
some  Catholics  to  live  somewhat  more  spiritedly,  and  has  not 
adopted  the  sharp  division  into  sacred  and  secular  culture  that 
reduces Jewish religiosity to observance of the High Holidays and 
permits  Jews  to  express  exuberance  in  their  organizational,  so-
cial, and cultural activities.  But the difference  is  not entirely due 
to  Puritanism,  for  "restrictive"  lower  middle  class  culture  ap-
pears  also  among  Catholics  who  have  moved  "up,"  especially 
German  and  Irish  ones,  and  even  among  Italians  and  among 
some Jews who have risen from working class origins. 

If "blandness"  is  the  word  for  this  quality,  it  stems  from  the 
transition in which the lower middle class finds itself between tlie 
familial  life  of the working class  and  the cosmopolitanism  of the 
upper middle class.  The working class  person need conform only 
within  the  family  circle  and  the  peer group,  but these  are  toler-
ant of his  other activities.  Believing that the outside world  is  un-
alterably hostile and  that little  is  to  be gained from  its  approval, 
he can  indulge in  boisterousness  that provides catharsis from  the 
tensions  generated  in  the  family  and  peer  circles.  The  upper 
middle  class  person,  on  the  other  hand,  is  lodged  firmly  in  the 
world outside  the  home.  At  times  he  may  have  trouble  reconcil-
ing the demands of home and outside world,  but he  has  a  secure 
footing in both. 

Lower middle class people seem to me to be caught in the mid-
dle. Those whose origins were in the working class  are no longer 
tied  lio  strongly  to  the  extended  family,  but  although  they  have 
gone out into  the larger society,  they  are  by no means at ease  in 
it. They do not share the norms of the cosmopolitans, but, unlike 
the working class,  they cannot ignore them.  As  a  result,  they find 
themselves  in  a  situation  in  which  every  neighbor  is  a  potential 
friend  or enemy and  every community issue  a  source of conflict, 
producing a  restraining and  even  inhibiting  influence  on  them. 
Others,  lower  middle  class  for  generations,  have  had  to  move 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

• 

.203  • 

from a  rural  or small-town  social  structure. They too  are  caught 
in  the  middle,  for  now  they  must  cope  with  a  larger  and  more 
heterogeneous  society,  for  which  their cultural and religious  tra-
ditions have not equipped them. 

If left  to  themselves,  lower  middle  class  people  do  what  they 
have always done:  put their energies into home and family,  seek-
ing  to  make  life  as  comfortable  as  possible,  and  supporting, 
broadening, and varying it with friends,  neighbors, church, and a 
voluntary associiltion. Because this way  of life is much like that of 
the small-town society or  the urban neighborhood in which they 
grew  up,  they  are  able  to  maintain  their  optimistic  belief  that 
Judeo-Christian  morality  is  a  reliable  guide  to  behavior.  This 
world  view (if one can endow it with so  philosophical a  name)  is 
best seen in  the pictures that amateur painters exhibited at PTA 
meetings in Levittown:  bright, cheerful landscapes, or portraits of 
children  and  pets  painted  in  primary colors,  reflecting  the  wish 
that the world be hopeful, humorous, and above all, simple.  Most 
important, their paintings insisted  that life can  be happy. 

Of course,  life  is  not really like  this,  for  almost everyone must 
live with  some disappoiutment:  an  unruly child, a  poor student, 
an unsatisfied husband, a  bored wife, a  bad job, a chronic illness, 
or financial  worry.  These realities are accepted because  they can-
not  be  avoided;  it  is  the  norms  of  the  larger  society  which  frus-
trate.  Partly desired and partly rejected, they produce an ambiva-
lence  which  appears  to  the  outsider  as  the  blandness  of  lower 
middle class  life. This ambivalence can  be  illustrated by  the  way 
Levittown  women  reacted  to  my  wife's  paintings.  Since  her 
studio was at home,  they had an opportunity to see her work and 
talk to her about being a  painter. The working class Italians with 
whom we had lived in Boston previously knew, by and large, how 
to  deal  with  her  activity.  Unacquainted  with  "art,"  they  could 
shrug  off  her  activity  and  her  abstract  expressionist  style  to  ad-
mire colors they liked or forms  that reminded them of something 
in their own experience.  Not knowing what it all  meant, and not 
having  to  know,  they concluded  that  painting  was  a  good  thing 
because  it  kept  her out  of  trouble,  preventing boredom  and  po-
tentially  troublesome  consequences  such  as  drinking  or  extra-
marital affairs. 

The lower middle class  Levittowners could  not cope  with  her 
paintings  as  easily.  They  did  not  like  her  abstract  expressionist 
style  any  more  than  the working class  women,  but  they  knew  it 

•  204  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

was  "art" and so  could not ignore  it.  They responded with anxi-
ety, some hostility, and particularly with envy of her ability to be 
"creative."  But  even  this  response  was  overlaid  with  ambiva-
lence. As  teenagers they had learned that creativity was desirable, 
and  many  had  had  some  cursory  training  in  drawing,  piano,  or 
needlework.  Once they had learned to be wives and mothers and 
had enough sociability,  the urge for creativity returned-but not 
the opportunity. 

For working class  women, keeping the  family  together and the 
bills  paid  is  a  full-time  job.  Upper middle class  women  are con-
vinced that life ought to be more than raising a family,  but lower 
middle  class  ones  are  not  that  sure.  They  want  to  venture  into 
nonfamilial  roles,  but not so  int,ensively as  to engender role con-
flict  and anxiety.  As a  result,  they search for  easy creativity, activ-
ities  that  do  not require,  as  Levittowners  put  it,  "upsetting  the 
family  and  household."  Serious  artistic activity  is  difficult  under 
such conditions, yet a compromise solution such as  needlework or 
painting-by-numbers  is  not  entirely  satisfactory  either,  because, 
however  rewarding,  people  know  it  is  not really  art.  One Levit-
towner  I  met  expressed  the  ambivalence  between  the  familial 
role and artistic aspirations in an especially tortured way.  She ex-
plained  that  she  was  very  sensitive  to  paintings,  but  confessed 
that  whenever  she  visited  museums,  she  would  begin  to  think 
about  her  family.  She  resolved  the  ambivalence  by  rejecting 
paintings  that  made  her  "think  too  much  about  art."  For  most 
people,  however,  the  ambivalence  is  less  intense. 

A  similarly ambivalent  pattern  is  evident  in governmental  in-
volvement.  Many  lower  middle  class  people  believe  that  the 
moral  framework  which  governs  their personal  lives,  the  sort  of 
relations  they  have  with  family  members  and  friends,  ought  to 
govern  organizational  life  and society as  well.  Any other  type  of 
behavior they call  "politics," in and out of political life, and they 
try  to  avoid  it as  immoral.  Working class  people  have  the  same 
perspective,  but they are also  realists and will  exploit politics for 
their own  ends,  and  upper middle class  people  believe  in  moral 
(reform)  politics,  but  its  norms  are  not  borrowed  from  the  fam-
ily,  Lower  middle  class  citizens  are  once  again  caught  between 
the standards of home and of the outside world, however, and the 
result is often political inaction. It is for them that politicians put 
on  performances  to  show  that  their  decisions  are  based  on  the 
standards  of  home  and  family  and  run  election  campaigns dem-

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 
onstrating the personal  honesty of their candidates and the oppo-
sition candidates'  immorality. 

•  205  • 

Of course,  these are cultural  propensities to  act,  and when  per-
sonal  interests  are  threatened,  lower  middle  class  people  defend 
them as  heartily as  anyone else.  Then, they identify their actions 
with  morality-so  much  so  that  they  lose  sight, of  their  self-
interest  and  are  easily  hurt when  others  point  out  to  them  that 
they  are  selfishly  motivated.  Whereas  working class  people  then 
become  cynical,  lower  middle  class  people  become  hypocritical, 
often without being conscious of it.  Blandness  turns easily  to bit-
terness,  anger,  and  blind  conflict-blind  because  every  act  of 
offense  or self-defense  is  clothed  in  the  terminology  of  personal 
morality. 

What appears as  blandness,  then,  to the outside observer is  the 
outcome  of  conflict  between self  and society,  and  between  what 
ought to be and what is.  When and if a lower middle class person 
is  secure, he appears bland, because he is  not really willing to act 
within  the larger society;  when he  is  threatened,  he  is  extremely 
angry,  because his moral view of the world is  upset.  One target of 
his  anger  is  the  working  class  people  who  are  less  bothered  by 
the  moral  dilemmas  of  the  larger  society;  another  is  the  upper 
middle class activists who keep pressuring him to translate moral-
ity into action and to take a stand on·community issues. 

Many  of  these  cultural  predispositions  seem  to  occur  more 
among lower middle class  women than among their husbands.  If 
the men  are  employed  in a  bureaucracy,  as  most are,  their work 
involves  them not only  in the larger  society  but also  in  office  or 
factory  political  struggles  which  leave  them  little  time  to  think 
about  the  ambivalence  between  the standards  of  home  and  out-
side  world.  The  women,  however,  caught  in  a  role  that  keeps 
them at home, are forever trying to break out of its confines, only 
to confront ambivalent situations.  They respond  with inhibiting 
blandness;  it is  they who are most concerned with respectability. 
Indeed, living with neighbors employed in large bureaucracies, I 
was  struck  over  and  over  again  by  the  feeling  that  if  the  men 
were  "organization men,"  they were  so  only by  necessity,  not by 
inclination, and that if they were left alone,  they would gravitate 
toward  untrammeled  creativity  and  individualism.  Their wives, 
on the other hand, defended what Whyte called the Social  Ethic, 
rejecting extreme actions and skeptical  opinions, and tried to get 
their men  to  toe  the line  of lower middle class  morality.  If any-

•  200  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

thing,  their  inclinations  drove  them  toward  being "organization 
women."  But  then,  they had  the  job of  maintaining  the family's 
status  image  on  the  block,  and  they spent  their days  in  the near-
anarchy created  by small  children.  Perhaps  they  were  simply es-
caping into  the order of lower middle class norms, while the men 
were  escaping  from  the  order  imposed  by  their  bureaucratic 
work. 

LEVITIOWN IS "ENDSVILLE": THE ADOLESCENT VIEW 

The adult conception  of  Levittown's vitality  is  not shared  by its 
ii,dolescents.  Many  consider  it  a  dull  place  to  which  they  have 
been  brought  involuntarily  by  their  parents.  Often  there is-no 
place to go and nothing to do after school. Although most adoles-
cents  have no trouble in  their student role,  many are bored after 
school  and some  are  angry,  expressing that anger  through  thinly 
veiled  hostility  to  adults  and  vandalism  against  adult  property. 
Their relationship  to  the  adults  is  fraught  with  tension,  which 
discourages community .attempts to solve  what is defined as  their 
recreational problem. 

Essays  which  students  in  grades  6-12  wrote  for  me  early  in 
1961  suggest that most children are satisfied with Levittown until 
adolescence. 26  Sixty-eight  per  cent  of  the  sixth-graders  liked 
Levittown,  but  only  45  per  cent  of  the  eighth-graders,  37  per 
cent of  the  tenth-graders,  and  39  per cent  of  the  twelfth-graders 
did. In comparison, 85  per cent of the adults responded positively 
to  a  similar  question. 27  Likes  and  dislikes  reflect  the  state  of 
recreational  and  social  opportunities.  Girls  make  little  use  of 
recreational  facilities  until  they  become  adolescents,  and  before 
the  tenth  grade,  they  like  Levittown  better  than  the  boys.  Dis-
likes  revolve  around  "nothing  to  do."  The  sixth- and  eighth-
grade boys say  there are not enough gyms,  playing fields,  or hills, 
and no transportation for getting to existing facilities.  Both sexes 
complain  about  the  lack  of  neighborhood  stores  and  that  the 
houses  are  too  small,  lack  privacy,  and  are  poorly  built.  By  the 
twelfth  grade,  disenchantment with  the  existing facilities  has  set 
in;  those  who like  Levittown  stress  the  newness and  friendliness 
of the community,  but references  to  the pool,  the  shopping cen-
ter,  and  the  bowling  alley  are  negative. 28  As  one  twelfth-grader 
pointed out,  "Either you  have  to pay a  lot of money to go  to  the 
movies  or  the  bowling  alley,  or you  go  to  too  many  parties and 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

•  207  • 

that gets  boring."  ~~ck of facilities ,is  reported most  often by the 
older girls,  for  the boys at least have athletic programs put on by 
civic groups. 29 

But  the  c~9_!1est gripe_ is  the  shortage  of  ready  transporta-
tio_Il!.  which makes  not only  facilities  but,  more  important,  other 
tt:.~.nage.rs- inaccessible.  One girl complained, "After school  hours, 
you  walk  into an entirely different world.  Everyone goes  his  own 
separate  way,  to  start  his  homework,  take  a  nap,  or  watch  TV. 
That is  the life  of a  vegetable,  not a  human  being." A  car,  then, 
becomes in a  way as  essential  to  teenagers as  to adults.  Moreover, 
many small-town  teenagers  like  to  meet  outside  the community, 
for  it  is  easier  to  "have  fun"  where  one's  parents  and  other 
known adults cannot disapprove. A high school senior who took a 
job to buy a car put it dramatically: 

I  had  no  choice,  it was  either going  to  work  or cracking 
up.  I  have  another week  of boring habits,  then  (when  I  get 
the car)  I'll  start living.  I  can  get  out of  Levittown  and  go 
to  other  towns  where  I  have  many  friends.  .  .  .  In  plain 
words, a  boy shouldn't live  here if he is  between  the ages of 
14-17.  At  this  age  he  is  using  his  adult  mind,  and  that 
doesn't mean riding a  bike or smoking his first cigarette. He 
wants to be big and popular and go out and live it up.  I  am 
just starting the life I  want.  I  couldn't ask  for  more than be-
ing a senior in a  brand new high school, with the best of stu-
dents and teachers, and my car on its way. 

Girls  are  less  likely  to  have  access  to  a  car,  and  one  explained, 
"We have  to  walk,  and  the  streets  wind,  and  cause  you  to  walk 
two miles instead of one as the crow flies." 

The adults have  provided some facilities  for  teenage activities, 
but not always  successfully.  One  problem  is  that "teenage" is  an 
adult  tag;  adolescents  grade  themselves  by  age.  Older  ones  re-
fused  to  attend  dances  with  the  younger  set,  considering  forced 
association  with  their  juniors  insulting.30  Some  adolescents  also 
found  the  adult chaperones  oppressive.  At  first,  the  chaperones 
interfered openly by urging strangers to dance with each other in 
order  to  get  everyone  on  the  floor  and  to  discourage  intimate 
dancing  among  couples.  When  the  teenagers  protested,  they 
stopped, but hovered uneasily in the background.31 

Specifically,  adolescent  malcontent  stems  from  two  sources: 
Levittown was not designed for  them, and adults are reluctant to 
provide the recreational facilities and gathering places they want. 

•  2o8  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Like  most  suburban  communities,  Levittown  was  planned  for 
families with young children. The bedrooms are too small  to per-
mit an adolescent to do anything but study or sleep;  they lack the 
privacy  and  soundproofing  to  allow  him  to  invite  his  friends 
over.  Unfortunately,  the  community  is  equally  inhospitable. 
Shopping  centers are  intended  for  car-owning adults,  and  in  ac-
cord with the desire of property owners,  are kept away from  resi-
dential  areas.  Being  new,  Levittown  lacks  low-rent  shopping 
areas which can afford to subsist on the marginal purchases made 
by  adolescents.  In  1961,  a  few  luncheonettes  in  neighborhood 
shopping centers and a candy store and a bowling alley in the big 
center were the only places  for  adolescents  to congregate.32  Com-
ing in droves,  they overwhelmed  those  places and  upset  the  mer-
chants.  Not  only do  teenagers  occupy space  without making sig-
nificant  purchases,  but  they  also  discourage  adult  customers. 
Merchants faced  with high rent cannot subsist on teenage  spend-
ing  and  complain  to  the  police  if  teenagers  "hang  out"  at  their 
places.  Street  corners  are  off  limits,  too,  for  a  clump  of  adoles-
cents soon  becomes noisy enough  to  provoke a  call  to  the police. 
Eventually  they  feel  hounded  and  even  defined  as  juvenile  de-
linquents.  Said  one  twelfth-grade  girl,  "I  feel  like  a  hood  to  be 
getting chased by the police for absolutely nothing." 

The schools  were  not  designed  for  after-hours  use,  except  for 
adults  and  for  student  activities  which--entertain  adults,  such  as 
varsity athletics. The auditoriums were made available for dances, 
although  when  these  began,  the  school administration  promptly 
complained  about  scuffed  floors  and  damaged  fixtures.  Only  at 
the  swimming pool  are  teenagers not in  the  way  of adult priori-
ties,  and during the day,  when  adults are  not  using it,  it  is  their 
major gathering place.  But even  here,  smoking and noisy activi-
ties are prohibited. 

The design deficiencies cannot be altered, and should not be if 
they  are a  problem  only  for  teenagers,  but  there  is  no  inherent 
reason  why  teenage  facilities  cannot  be  provided.  However, 
adults disagree on what is  needed and,  indeed, on the desirability 
of facilities,  for reasons  partly political,  but fundamentally social 
and psychological.  For one thing, adults are uncertain about how 
to  treat  teenagers;  for  another,  they  harbor  a  deep  hostility  to-
ward  them  which  is  cultural  and,  at  bottom,  sexual  in  nature. 
There are  two  adult views  of the teenager,  one permissive,  the 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

other restrictive.  The former argues that a  teenager is  a responsi-
ble individual who should be allowed to run his own affairs with 
some adult help.  The  latter,  subscribed  to by  the  majority,  con-
siders him still a child who needs adult supervision and whose ac-
tivities  ought  to  be  conducted  by  adult  rules  to  integrate  him 
into adult society.  For example,  when  one of the community or-
ganizations  set  up  teenage  dances,  there  was  some  discussion 
about whether teenagers should run them.  Not only was  this idea 
rejected,  but  the  adults  then  ran  the dances  on  the  basis  of  the 
"highest" standards.33  Boys  were  required  to  wear  ties  and  jack-
ets,  girls,  dresses,  on  the  assumption  that  this  would  encourage 
good  behavior, whereas  blue jeans,  tee  shirts,  and sweaters  some-
how would  not.  The adults could  not resist  imposing  their own 
norms of dress in exchange for providing dances. 

The advocates  of restriction also  rejected  the  permissive  point 
of  view  because  they  felt  it  wrong  to  give  teenagers  what  they 
wanted.  Believing  that  teenagers  had  it  "too  easy,"  they  argued 
that "if you make  them work for  programs, they appreciate them 
more."  Logically,  they  should,  therefore,  have  let  the  teenagers 
set  up their own  activities,  but their arguments were  not guided 
by logic;  they were, rather, rationalizations  for their fear of teen-
agers.  Although  the  "permissives"  pointed  out  that  teenagers 
might  well  set  up  stricter  rules  than  adults,  the  "restrictives" 
feared  catastrophes:  fights,  the  "wrong crowd"  taking over,  preg-
nancies,  and contraceptives found  in or near the  teenage  facility. 
These fears  accounted for  the  rules governing dances  and  inhib-
ited the establishment of an adult-run teenage center, for  the vol-
untary associations and the politicians were afraid that if violence 
or sexual activity occurred, they would be blamed for it. 

The problem is  twofold:  restrictive adults want adolescents  to 
be children  preparing for  adulthood,  and  are  threatened  by  the 
teenage or youth  culture  they see  around  them.  By  now,  adoles-
cents  are  a  cultural  minority  like  any  other,  but  whereas  no 
Levittowners  expect  Italians  to  behave  like  Jews,  most  still  ex-
pect teenagers to behave like children. They are supposed  to par-
ticipate  in  the family  more  than  they do and,  legally still  under 
age,  to  subsume  their  own  wishes  to  the  adults'.  The failure  of 
teenagers  to go along is  blamed on  the parents as  well.  If parents 
would only tal-e more interest in their adolescent children, sp.end 
more time with  them,  be "pals" with  them, and so  on,  then mis-

•  210  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

behavior-and even  youth culture-would not develop.  This ar-
gument  is  supported  by  the claim  that delinquency  is  caused  by 
broken homes or by both parents' holding full-time jobs. 

Such  views  are  espoused  particularly  by  Catholics,  who  share 
traditional working class  attitudes;  the  parochial school, with  its 
emphasis on  discipline  to  keep children  out  of  trouble,  is  their 
embodiment.  Even  adult-devised  programs  are considered  unde-
sirable,  for,  as  one  Catholic working class  father  put it,  "In sum-
mer,  children  should  either  work  or  be-at  home.  Summer  arts 
and  crafts  programs are  a  waste  of  time.  My  kid  brought  home 
dozens  of  pictures.  What's  he  going  to  do  with  so  many  pic-
tures?"  The adolescents'  social  choices are also restricted.  Adults 
active in youth programs frequently  try to break up their groups, 
damning  them  as  cliques  or  gangs,  and  even  separating  friends 
when athletic teams are chosen. Some teenagers react by minimiz-
ing  contact  with  adults,  pursuing  their  activities  privately  and 
becoming  remarkably uncommunicative.  In essence,  they  lead  a 
separate  life  which  frees  them/from  undue  parental  control  and 
gives an air of mystery to the teenager and his culture. 

Among restrictive adults,  the image of the  teenager is  of an ir-
responsible,  parasitic  individual,  who  attends  school  without 
studying, hangs out with his  peers looking for  fun and adventure, 
and gets  into trouble-above all, over sex.  There were rumors of 
teenage  orgies  in  Levittown's  school  playgrounds,  in  shopping 
center  parking  lots,  and  on  the  remaining  rural  roads  of  the 
township.  The  most  fantastic  rumor  had  44  girls  in  the  senior 
class pregnant, with one boy singlehandedly responsible for six of 
them.  Some  inquiry on  my  part  turned  up  the  facts:  two  senior 
girls  were  pregnant  and  one  of  them  was  about  to  be  married. 
If the  essays  the  students  wrote  for  me  have  any  validity,  the 
gap  between  adult  fantasy  and  adolescent  reality  is  astonishing. 
Most  teenagers  do  not  even  date;  their  social  life  takes  place  in 
groups.  Judging  by  their  comments  about  the  friendliness  of 
adult  neighbors,  they  are  quiet  youngsters  who  get  along  well 
with  adults  and  spend  most  of  their  time  preparing  themselves 
for  adulthood.  Needless  to  say,  these  essays  would  not  have  re-
vealed  delinquent  activities  or  sex  play.  However,  I  doubt  that 
more  than  5  per cent  of  the older  teenagers  live  up to anything 
like the adult image of them. 

What,  then,  accounts  for  the  discrepancy?  For  one  thing, 
adults take little interest  in  their children's education;  they want 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

•  211 

• 

to be assured  that  their children are getting along in school,  but 
not  much  more.  The  bond  that  might  exist  here  is  thus absent. 
Changes  in  education  during  the  last  two  decades  have  been so 
great  that  even interested  parents can do little  to help  their chil-
dren with  their school  work.  Consequently,  adults focus  on teen-
agers  in  their nonstudent roles,  noting their absence  from  horne, 
the  intensity  of  their  tie  to  friends  and  cliques,  and  their  re-
belliousness. 

Second,  there  is  the  normal  gap  between  the  generations,  en-
larged by the recent flowering of youth culture, much of which is 
incomprehensible or unesthetic to adults. Despite the parents' be-
lief  that  they should  be  responsible  for  their  adolescents'  behav-
ior,  they cannot participate in many joint activities or talk mean-
ingfully  with  them  about  the  experiences  and  problems  of 
teenage  life.  This  gap  is  exacerbated  by  a  strange  parental  am-
nesia about their own-not so distant-adolescence. I  recall a  let-
ter  written by a  twenty-one-year-old  mother who wanted  to  help 
the Township Committee set  up a delinquency prevention coun-
cil  because she  was  concerned about teenage  misbehavior. 

Third,  there  is  enough  teenage  vandalism and delinquency  to 
provide  raw  material  for  the  adult  image,  although  not  enough 
to  justify  it.  According  to  the  police  and  the  school  superin-
tendent, serious delinquency in Levittown was  minimal;  in  1961, 
about  so  adolescents  accounted  for  most  of  it.  Many  were  chil-
dren  from  working class  backgrounds  who did  poorly  in  school, 
or from  disturbed middle class  families.  From  1959  to  1961, only 
12  cases  were serious  enough  to go  to  the county juvenile court, 
and some were repeaters.  Vandalism  is  more prevalent.  The first 
victim was the old Willingboro YMCA, which was  wrecked twice 
before  it  was  torn  down.  Schools  have  been  defaced,  windows 
broken,  garbage  thrown  into  the  pools,  ftowerbeds  destroyed, 
and bicycles. "borrowed." The perpetrators are rarely caught,  but 
those  who are  caught  are  teenagers,  thus  making  it  possible  for 
adults to suspect all adolescents and maintain their image. 

Finally,  some  adults  seem  to  project  their  own  desires  for  ex-
citement  and  adventures  onto  the  youngsters.  For  them,  teen-
agers  function  locally  as  movie  stars  and  beatniks do  on  the  na-
tional  ~cene-as exotic  creatures  reputed  to  live  for  sex  and  ad-
venture.  Manifestly,  teenagers  act  as  more  prosaic  entertainers: 
in varsity athletics, high school dramatic societies, and bands, but 
the girls are also expected to provide glamor.  One of the first  ac-

•  212  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

tivities  of  the  Junior  Chamber  of  Commerce  was  a  Miss  Levit-
town  contest,  in  which  teenage  girls  competed  for  honors  in 
evening  gown,  bathing  suit,  and  talent  contests-the  "talent" 
usually  involving  love  songs  or  covertly  erotic  dances.  At  such 
contests unattainable maidens show off their sexuality-often un-
consciously-in  order  to  win  the  nomination.  Men  in  the  audi-
ence  comment sotto  voce  about  the  girls'  attractiveness,  wishing 
to  sleep  with  them  and  speculating  whether  that  privilege  is 
available  to  the  contest  judges  and  boyfriends.  From  here,  it  is 
only a short step to the conviction that girls are promiscuous with 
their  teenage  friends,  which  heightens  adult envy,  fear,  and  the 
justification  for  restrictive  measures.  The se:lalal  function  of  the 
teenager  became  apparent  when  the  popularity  of  the  Miss 
Levittown contest led to plans for a  Mrs.  Levittown contest. This 
plan  was  quickly  dropped,  however,  for  the  idea  of  married 
women  parading in bathing suits was  thought to be in bad  taste, 
especially  by  the women.  Presumably,  young mothers are  poten-
tial  sexual  objects,  whereas  the  teenagers  are,  like  movie  stars, 
unattainable,  and  can  therefore  serve  as  voyeuristic  objects. 

Although suburbia is often described as a hotbed of adultery in 
popular fiction,  this  is  an  urban  fantasy.  Levittown  is  quite  mo-
nogamous,  and  I  am  convinced  that  most  suburbs  are  more  so 
than  most cities.34  The desire  for  sexual  relations with attractive 
neighbors may be ever present, but when life is lived in a goldfish 
bowl,  adultery is  impossible  to hide from  the  neighbors--even  if 
there  were  motels  in  Levittown  and  baby-sitters  could be found 
for  both  parties.  Occasionally  such  episodes  do  take  place,  after 
which  the  people  involved  often  run  off  together  or  leave  the 
community.  There are  also  periodic  stories of  more  bizarre  sex-
ual  escapades,  usually  about  community  leaders.  In  one  such 
story,  a  local  politician  was  driving down  the  dark roads  of  the 
township  in  a  sports  car  with  a  naked  young  woman  while  his 
wife  thought he was at a  political meeting. If there was any road-
side adultery, however,  it remained unreported, for no cases ever 
appeared  on  the  police  blotters  during  the  two  years  I  saw 
them. 3 ~  Similar stories  made  the rounds  in  Park Forest,  the  new 
town  I  studied  in  1949,  and  one  of  them,  which  began  after  a 
party  where  some  extramarital  necking  had  taken  place,  soon 
reported  the  gathering  as  a  wife-swapping orgy. 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

•  213  • 

"The Juvenile  Problem"  and Its  Solutions 

The cultural differences  between  adults  and adolescents  have 
precipitated an  undeclared and subconscious war between them, 
as  pervasive  as  the  class  struggle,  which  prevents  the  adults 
from solving what they call  "~_ejuvenile problem." Indeed, put-
ting it that way is  part of the trouble, for much of the adult effort 
has  been  aimed  at -~iscouraging delinquency,  providing  recrea-
tional activities in the irrational belief that these could prevent it. 
Sports  programs were  supposed  to  exhaust  the  teenagers  so  that 
they would be too  tired to get into trouble  (harking back  to the 
Victorian myth  that a  regimen of cold showers and sports would 
dampen  sexual  urges,  although  ironically,  varsity  athletes  were 
also suspected of being stellar sexual  performers);  dances were to 
keep  them  off  the  street.  When  delinquency  did  not  abate,  a 
Youth  Guidance Commission  to deal  with "the problem," and a 
Teenage  Panel  to  punish  delinquencies  too  minor  for  court ac-
tions,  were  set  up.  The police chief  asked  for  a  curfew  to  keep 
youngsters off  the street at night, hoping to  put pressure on par-
ents  to act as  enforcing agents  and  to get his department out of 
the  cross  fire  between  teenagers,  merchants,  and  home  owners. 
Chasing  the  teenagers  from  shopping  centers and  street  corners 
was  useless,  for  having  no  other  place  to  go  they  always  re-
turned the next night, particularly since they knew people would 
not swear out complaints against their neighbors'  (or customers') 
children. The police chief also did not want "the kids to feel  they 
are being bugged," for they would come to hate his men and cre-
ate more  trouble  for  them.86  If he cracked  down  on  them,  they 
would  retaliate;  if  he  did  not,  the  adults  would  accuse  him  of 
laxity.  Although  the  curfew  was  strongly  supported  by  parents 
who  could  not  control  their  children,  it  was  rejected  as  unen-
forceable. 

Adult solutions to the juvenile problem were generally  shaped 
by  other institutional  goals which  took  priority  over  adolescent 
needs.  The organizations which scheduled  dances  wanted  to ad-
vertise themselves and their community service inclinations, even 
competing for  the  right  to  hold  them,  and  the  churches  set  up 
youth  groups  to  bring  the  teenagers  into  the  church.  Indeed, 
those  who decide  on adolescent  programs  either have  vested  in-
terests in keeping teenagers in a  childlike status (parents and  ed-
ucators, for example) or are charged with the protection of adult 

•  214  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

interests (police and politicians). The primacy of adult priorities 
was  brought  out  by  a  1961  PTA  panel  on  "How  Is  Our  Com· 
munity Meeting the Needs of the Adolescents?" With one excep· 
tion  the  panelists  (chosen  to represent the various adults respon· 
sible  for  teenagers)  ignored  these  needs,  talking only about what 
teenagers  should  do  for  them.  For  example,  the  parent  on  the 
panel  said,  "The needs  of adolescents should  first  be  met  in  the 
home and young energies  should  be guided  into  the proper nor· 
mal channels." The teacher suggested that "parents should never 
undermine  the  authority  of  the  teacher.  Parents  should  help 
maintain  the  authority  of  the  school  over  the  child,  and  the 
school will  in turn help maintain the authority of the parent over 
the  child."  The  minister  urged  parents  to  "encourage  youth 
leadership  responsibilities  within  the  church,"  and  the  police 
chief  explained  "the  importance  of  teaching  adolescents  their 
proper relationship  to  the law  and  officers  of  the  law." 37 

Political incentives for a  municipal or even a semipublic recre· 
ation  program were also absent.  Not only were  prospective spon· 
sors afraid they would be held  responsible  for  teenage misbehav· 
ior occurring under  their auspices,  but in  1961  not  many  Levit· 
towners  had  adolescent  children  and  not  all  of  them  favored  a 
public program. Middle class parents either had no problems with 
their  youngsters  or  objected  to  the  working  class  advocacy  of 
municipal  recreation,  and  some  working  class  parents  felt  that 
once  children  had  reached  adolescence  they  were  on  their  own. 
The eventual clients of the  program,  the adolescents,  had no po 
litical influence whatsoever. They were too young to vote, and al-
though they might have persuaded their parents to demand facil· 
ities  for  them,  they  probably  suspected  that  what  their  parents 
wanted  for  them  was  more  of what  had  already  been  provided. 
In  the end,  then,  the adults got used  to  the little delinquency 
and  vandalism  that  took  place,  and  the  teenagers  became  sullen 
and unhappy, complaining, "This place in Endsville,"  and wish· 
ing their parents would move back to communities which had fa. 
cilities for them or pressuring them for cars to go to neighboring 
towns. 

The  best  summary  of  what  is  wrong-and  what  should  be 
done-was stated  concisely  by  a  twelfth-grade  essayist:  "I  think 
the adults should spend less  time watching for us to do something 
wrong and  help  us  raise  money  for  a  community center.  We're 
not asking for it, we only want their help." If one begins with the 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

•  215  • 

assumption that  adolescents  are  rational and  responsible  human 
beings  whose  major  "problem"  is  that  they  have  become  a  dis-
tinctive minority subculture,  it is  not too difficult  to suggest pro-
grams.  What else  the  teenagers want in the way of recreation can 
be readily  inferred  from  their essays:  besides  the center,  a  range 
of  inexpensive  coffeehouses  and  soda  shops  and  other  meeting 
places,  bowling alleys, amusement arcades,  places for dancing, ice 
and  roller  skating  rinks,  garages  for  mechanically  inclined  car 
owners  (all  within walking or bicycling distance or accessible  by 
public  transportation),  and  enough  of  each  so  that  the  various 
age groups and separate cliques have  facilities  they can call  their 
own.  Since  adolescents  are  well  supplied  with  spending  money, 
many  of  these  facilities  can  be  set  up  commercially.  Others 
may  need  public support.  It would,  for  example,  be  possible  to 
provide some municipal subsidies to luncheonette operators who 
are willing to make  their businesses  into  teenage social  centers.88 
Recreational and social facilities are not enough, however.  Part 
of  the  adolescents'  dissatisfaction  with  the  community-as  with 
adult  society  in  general-is  their  functionlessness  outside  of 
school.  American society really has no use for  them other than as 
students,  and condemns  them  to  spend  most  of  their spare  time 
in  recreational  pursuits.  They  are  trying  to  learn  to  be  adults, 
but since  the community and  the larger society want them  to be 
children,  they  learn  adulthood only at school-and there  imper-
fectly.  Yet many tasks  in the community now go unfilled because 
of lack of public funds,  for example, clerical, data-gathering, and 
other functions at city hall; and tutoring children, coaching their 
sports, and leading  their recreational  programs. These are mean-
ingful duties, and I  suspect  many adolescents could fill  them,  ei-
ther  on  a  voluntary  or a  nominal  wage  basis.  Finally,  teenagers 
want  to  learn  to  be  themselves  and do  for  themselves.  It should 
be possible to give  them facilities of their own-or even land on 
which  they  could  build-and  let  them  organize,  construct,  and 
run their own centers and work places. 

Needless  to  say,  such  autonomy  would  come  up  against  the 
very  real  political  difficulties  that  faced  the  more  modest  pro-
grams  suggested  in  Levittown,  and  would  surely  be  rejected  by 
the community.39 The ideal solution, therefore, is to plan for teen-
age  needs  outside  the  local  adult decision-making structure,  and 
perhaps even  outside  the community.  It might  be  possible  to  es-
tablish Teenage Authorities that would play the same interstitial 

•  216  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

role  in  the governmental  structure as  other authorities set up in 
connection  with  intercommunity  and  regional  planning  func-
tions.  Perhaps  the most  feasible  approach  is  to develop  commer-
cially profitable facilities,  to be set up either by teenagers or by a 
private entrepreneur who would need to be less sensitive to polit-
ical  considerations  than  a  public agency.  If and when  the  "juve-
nile  problem"  becomes  more  serious  in  the  suburbs,  federal 
funds  may  become  available  for  facilities  and  for  programs  to 
create jobs,  like those  now being developed  for  urban  teenagers. 
Most  likely,  this  will  only  happen  when  "trouble"  begins  to 
mount. 

NOTES 

1.  See,  e.g.,  Fromm,  pp.  154-163;  and Stein,  Chaps.  g and  12. 
2.  This charge  is  made  by  Keats  and,  in  more qualified  and  muted 

tones,  by  Riesman  (1957). 

3·  This cannot be  surmised either from  inferences about media con-
tent or from sociological surveys,  but becomes quite evident when 
one watches TV with other people, as  I did with my  neighbors. 
'l·  I  had  observed  the  same  reactions  among  the  working  class  Bos-
tonians  I  studied  previously,  although  they  were  more  interested 
in  the  performers  than  the  Levittowners.  Gans  (1g62a),  Chap.  g. 
5·  Wilensky,  p.  237·  See  also  Kornhauser,  Chap.  3·  and  Lipset, 

pp.  66-67. 

6.  Fifty-six per cent of the random sample and 44  per cent of the city 

sample reported more participation  than  previously. 

7.  In  this  respect,  the  Levittowners  differed  significantly  from  the 
residents  of  Springdale,  a  rural  community  in  New  York  State, 
who developed a set of illusions to hide their dependence on  state 
and  national  political  and  economic  forces.  See  Vidich  and 
Bensman. 

8.  Part of the difficulty is  that critics compare the  present generation 
to  the  previous generation,  that  of  the  Depression,  which  was  an 
unusual period in  American history and no baseline for  historical 
comparisons  of  any  kind. 

g.  There is  no secular  trend in  turnover,  however,  for  between  1961 
and  1964  the rate in  the first  neighborhood increased from  12  per 
cent  to only  14  per cent,  but  the  third and fourth  neighborhoods 
both  showed  turnover  rates  of  19  per  cent  in  1964.  Renting  oc-
curs  primarily because  the  softness  of  the  housing  market  makes 
it  difficult  for  people  to  sell  their  houses  without  a  considerable 
loss;  they  find  it more  profitable  to  rent  them,  with  management 
turned over to the local realtors. 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 
10.  According to a. story in the October 21,  1957 issue of Long Island's 
Newsday, 27  per cent of the first  18oo  families in Levittown,  New 
York,  were still living there ten years later. 

•  217  • 

11.  Another  10  per cent  left  because  they  were  unhappy  in  the  com-
munity;  7 per cent, for financial reasons;  5 per cent, because of an 
excessive  journey  to  work;  and  4  per cent,  because  of  death,  di· 
vorce, or other changes in the  family.  These figures  were  collected 
from real estate men and people selling their homes privately and 
may not be entirely reliable.  Real estate men may not be  told  the 
real  reasons  for  selling  and  private  sellers  may  have  been  reluc-
tant  to  mention  financial  problems.  However,  only  about  1  per 
cent of the houses were  foreclosed annually. 

12.  In  the  mid-195os,  when  Park  Forest  was  seven  years  old,  annual 
turnover of  homes  was  20  per  cent.  See  Whyte  (1956),  p.  303.  In 
Levittown,  New  York,  a  1961  study  reported  an  average  annual 
rate of about  15  per cent. See  Orzack and Sanders, p.  13.  In Levit-
town, Pennsylvania, the rate varied from 12  to 15  per cent between 
1952  and  1960. See Anderson and Settani. A study  of a  forty-year-
old English  new  town  reported an annual rate of  10  per cent  the 
first  ten years, which has now dropped to 1 per cent. See Willmott 
(1963),  p.  20.  A  study  of  3o,ooo  apartments  in  519  buildings  all 
over the  country,  conducted by  the  Institute of Real  Estate  Man-
agement  and  reported  in  the  New  York  Times  of  November  10, 
1963,  showed  an annual  turnover of  28  per cent,  and  35  per cent 
for garden apartments. 

13.  Eighty-four  per  cent  of  the  Transients  reported  organizational 
membership  at  the  time of  the second  interview,  as  compared  to 
86  per  cent  of  the  Mobiles  and  only  44  per  cent  of  the  Settlers. 
Sixty-two  per  cent  of  the  Transients  belonged  to  organizations 
other  than  the  church,  compared  to  only  25  per  cent  of  the 
Settlers. 

14.  Seventy-five  per cent  of  the Transients  were  more  active  than  in 
their former  residence,  as compared to 6o per cent of the Settlers, 
and  none  of  the  Transients  but  20  per  cent  of  the  Settlers  said 
they were less  active  than  before. 

15.  The mean  number of couples  named  by  Transients was  2.75;  by 
Mobiles, 3.25;  and by Settlers, 3·3· Nineteen per cent of the Tran-
sients said they had no friends in Levittown, as  compared to 8 per 
cent of the Settlers. 

16.  Whyte (1956),  p. 289. 
17.  Webber. 
18.  Gutman,  p.  180. 
19.  See,  e.g.,  Fried. 
20.  Gordon,  Gordon,  and  Gunther.  This  study  did  not  distinguish 
between  residential  and  social  mobility,  but  its  case  studies  of 
disturbed suburbanites suggest the deleterious effects of the latter. 

21.  Pederson  and Sullivan. 
u. This study-by Gabower-came  to  other conclusions,  but a  close 

•  218  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

reading  of  her  data  shows  that  the  strains  of  the  long  and  ardu-
ous climb  required  of an  enlisted  man  in  the  Navy  who  becomes 
an  officer  were  passed  on  to  the  children.  Conversely,  children 
from  middle  class  homes,  whose  fathers  had  graduated  from  An-
napolis,  rarely  suffered  emotionally  from  geographical  mobility. 
Teenagers of both groups suffered  from  moving,  however. 

23.  The question  read:  "Some people have said that communities  like 
Levittown  arc  pretty dull,  without any excitement or interesting 
things  to  do.  How  do  you  feel  about  that?  Do  you  agree  or  dis-
agree?" 

24.  This  respondent  was  describing  the  extremely  active  social  life 
of  the  Jewish  community.  Even  so,  Jews  (particularly  the  better 
educated)  were  more  likely  than  non-Jews  to  agree  that  Levit-
town was dull. Jews also seem to be more interested in city amuse-
ments. 

25.  Cosmopolitan  friends  often  asked  me if I  did not find  Levittown 
dull.  As  a  participant-observer,  I  could  not  answer  the  question, 
for  I  was  immersed  in  community  life  and  strife  and  saw  all  of 
their  vitality  and  excitement.  Even  the  most  routine  event  was 
interesting because  I  was  trying  to  fit  it into an overall  picture of 
the community. As  a  resident,  I  enjoyed being with  Levittowners, 
and  the  proportion  of  dull  ones  was  certainly  no  higher  than  in 
academic  or  any  other circles.  Of course,  Levittown  lacked  some 
of  the  urban  facilities  that  I,  as  a  city-lover,  like  to  patronize.  It 
was not dull, however-but then I  would not make a  public judg-
ment  about  any  community  simply  because  it  could  not  satisfy 
some  of  my  personal  preferences,  particularly  when  the  commu-
nity seemed  to  satisfy  the  preferences of  the  majority of residents 
so  well. 

26.  The students  were  asked  what  they  liked  and  disliked  about  liv-
ing  in  Levittown,  and  what  they  missed  from  their  former  res-
idence.  Since  they  were  not  asked  to  sign  their  names,  and  the 
questions were general, I  believe  the essays  were honest  responses. 
I  purposely included no questions about the schools,  and  teachers 
were instructed not to give any guidance about how the questions 
should  be  answered.  (One  teacher  did  tell  the  children  what  to 
write,  and  these  essays  were  not  analyzed.)  The  data  presented 
here are based on a sample of one sixth- and one eighth-grade class 
from  each  of  the  three  elementary  schools,  and  of  all  tenth- and 
twelfth-grade classes. 

27.  The  data  are  not  strictly  comparable,  for  the  adults  were  asked 
outright whether they liked or disliked living in Levittown, where-
as  the  teenagers'  attitudes  were  inferred  from  the  tone  of  the 
essays. 

_ 

28.  Twenty-eight per cent of the boys liked the community's newness; 
18  per cent, the friendly people. Among the girls, 34 per cent liked 
the  people;  20  per cent,  Levittown's newness. 

29.  Twenty-five  per  cent of  the  tenth-graders  and  50  per cent  of  the 

The  Vitality  of  Community  Culture 

•  219  • 

twelfth-graders say  there is  nothing to do,  and 25  per cent and 46 
per cent,  respectively,  mention  the  lack  of  recreational  facilities. 
Among the  twelfth-grade girls, 56  per cent mention it. 

30.  Similarly  in  the  elementary  schools,  seventh- and  eighth-graders 
complained  about  having  to  go  to  school  with  "immature"  and 
"childish"  students;  when  they  were  moved  to  the  high  school, 
the  older  students  objected  to  their  presence  in  the  same  terms. 
31.  There  was  also  a  dispute  over  programming:  the  adults  wanted 
slow  music  and  the  traditional  dances  they  knew  best;  the  teen-
agers wanted the latest best-selling records  and  the  newest dances. 
They  signed  petitions  for  the  ouster  of  the  man  who  chose  the 
records,  but  the  adults  refused  to  accept  the  petitions,  arguing 
that they would be followed  by  petitions to oust  the school  super-
intendent. 

32.  Indeed,  the  existing  teenage  hangouts  in  little  luncheonettes  re-
sulted from  the lucky accident  that  the  builder and  the  township 
planner  were  unable  to  regulate  and  limit  the  number ·of small 
shopping centers which sprang upon the edge of the community. 
33·  At  one  point  adult-run  dances  failed  to  attract  teenagers,  and  a 
group  of  teenage  leaders  was  delegated  to  run  the  dances  them-
selves.  This foundered  because other teenagers disagreed with the 
rules and program set up by  these  leaders,  and since  only one op-
portunity for  dancing was  provided,  they  could  express  their dis-
agreement only by  nonattendance. 

34·  A  comparison  of  urban  and  suburban  marriages  indicated  that 
extramarital  affairs  occur  principally  in  older and  well-educated 
populations,  and  that'  place  of  residence  is  irrelevant.  Ubell. 
For  another  observer's  skepticism  about  suburban  adultery,  see 
Whyte  (1956),  pp.  355-357. 

35·  Since  the  blotter  listed  adolescent  promiscuity,  adult  suicide  at-
tempts,  and  even  drunkenness  and  family  quarrels  among  com-
munity leaders,  I  assume it was  not censored  to  exclude  adultery. 
36.  Actually, since the police usually sided with the merchants against 

th~ teenagers,  the latter did feel  "bugged." 

37·  "Panel Features Junior High P.T.A. Meeting," Levittown Herald, 

January 26,  1961. 

38.  A  combination  neighborhood  store  and  social  center  has  been 
proposed in the plan for the new town of Columbia, Maryland. 
!l9·  In 1966, no teenage centers had yet been established in Levittown, 
and campaigning politicians were  still arguing about the  wisdom 
of doing so. 

D 

Chapter Ten 

D 

FAMILY  AND  INDIVIDUAL 
ADAPTATION 

D 

D 

THE  SUBURBAN  CRITIQUE  CONSIDERS  LIFE  BEYOND  Tf!E  CITY  LIMITS 
h.acrmful  both  to  family life  and  to  the  happiness  and  mental 
health  of  the individual.  The critics  have  argued  that long com-
mutation by the father is helping to create a suburban matriarchy 
with  deleterious  effects  on  the  children,  and  that  homogeneity, 
social  hyperactivity,  and  the absence  of  urban stimuli create de-
pression,  boredom,  loneliness,  and  ultimately,  mental  illness.1 
The findings from Levittown suggest just the opposite-that sub-
urban  life  has  produced  more  family  cohesion  and a  significant 
boost in morale through the reduction of boredom and loneliness. 
Some problems remain, and since  this  study  is  not intended  as  a 
eulogy for suburban living, I  will emphasize  them.  Even so,  most 
Levittowners have adapted positively  to  their new community. 

By  "adaptation,"  I  mean simply how  people respond  to  Levit-
town;  I  use  the  term  neither  normatively  nor  negatively,  but 
descriptively.  I  assume  that people sometimes adjust to  the situa-
tions they face and sometimes react against  them,  but whether or 
not they ought to do either is  up to them.  Similarly,  I  take it for 
granted  that  people  know  when  they  are  bored  and,  if properly 
asked, can report their feelings.  Of course,  they cannot tell  about 
subconscious  maladaptation  and  boredom,  but when  it surfaced 
in  their  answers  or  was  apparent  from  my  observations,  I  have 
reported  it  here.  I  do  not  want,  however,  to  impute  boredom 
simply  because  some  critics'  standards dictate  that  Levittowners 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

•  221 

• 

ought  to  have  been  bored  by  activities  they  actually  enjoyed. 
Finally, 
respondents  may  have  underreported  undesirable 
changes  and  overreported  desirable  ones,  and  the  percentages 
that follow  should  be read  with  this  in  mind.2  Because  women, 
who report undesirable changes more often than men, were over-
represented  in  my  interview  samples,  however,  this  discrepancy 
may cancel  out. 

THE QUALITY OF FAMILY LIFE 

Since people move  to  the suburbs as  families,  it is difficult to sep-
arate individual from family adaptation, and maladaptation often 
affects  people  in  their  family  roles.  Obviously,  many  Levittown-
ers came partly to facilitate family life:  to have more space  in the 
house  and  a  yard  so  that  young  children  could  play  without 
supervision,  while  parents  spent  more  time  with  other  children 
and  adults.  Forty  per  cent  of  the  wives  and  65  per  cent  of  the 
husbands  waru~d to  spend  more  time  with  their  children  in 
Levittown,  and  interestingly  enough,  all  of  the  former  city 
dwellers,  as  compared  to  half  of  the  previous suburbanites  and 
none of the small-towners,  expressed  this  wish.  Evidently,  life  in 
the suburbs deprives parents of time with their children less  than 
that  in  the city.  Because of the charge  that suburbia encourages 
matriarchy,  I  was  curious whether wives  wanted  their  husbands 
to  spend  more  time  with  the  children;  45  per cent did,  but al-
most  the  same  number  wished  to  be  with  their  children  more 
themselves.  Again, former urban wives felt this need most often.3 
Levittown  made  it  possible  for  these  particular  parents  to 
achieve  their wishes,  for  85  per cent of the wives and 71  per cent 
of the husbands wanting more time with the children now had it. 
For the sample as  a  whole, about 40  per cent were with the chil-
dren more frequently,  but the remaining 6o per cent reported no 
change.  And  all  of  the  wives  who  wanted  their  husbands  to  de-
vote themselves more to the children got what they wished.• The 
new house was the cause, for children and adults were around the 
house more, and they often worked together on the yard. 

Moving  to  Levittown  did  not cut  into  the  time  available  for 
family  activities,  for  the  journey  to  work,  often  alleged  to  have 
this  effect,  did not change  significantly.  It changed even  less  for 
former  city  dwellers,  who  previouily  commuted  longer  than 
suburbanites,  than  for  the  random  sample.  The Philadelphians' 

•  222  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

median  trip  increased  from  35  minutes each  way  to  37  after  the 
move,  with  11  per  cent  now  reporting  a  short  trip  (o-19  min-
utes);  47  per cent  a  medium  one  (2o-39  minutes);  31  per cent 
a  long  one  (4o-59  minutes);  and  11  per  cent  a  very  long  one 
(6o  minutes  or  more). 5  Twenty-five  per  cent reported  a  length-
ier commute  than  before,  but  30  per cent a  shorter  one,  and 45 
per cent reported  no  change.  The median  increase  was  30  min-
utes;  the  median decrease,  22. 6  People  with  lengthier commutes 
now  traveled  a  median  45  minutes,  although  33  per cent  had  a 
long trip and 25  per cent a very long one. 7 

Levittowners  did  not  share  the  critics'  and  the  planners'  dis-
taste for commuting.  l\fost said they like or do not mind a trip up 
to  40  minutes;  only a  longer one garnered  a  significant  number 
of dislikes. 8  One third  of the  Philadelphians said  their commute 
was  "wearing," and what made it so was not trip length but mode 
of travel,  two  thirds of those  taking the bus,  37  per cent of those 
driving,  and  only  20  per  cent  of  car  pool  members  reporting 
weariness after their journey.9  Indeed, for some people,  the drive 
to and from  work is  one of the few  moments of total  privacy and 
may  thus be a  relaxing transition  between  the social  demands of 
the  job  and  the  family. 1° Conversely,  the car  pool  is  a  soqial  ex-
perience,  and  in  a  community  like  Levittown,  it  becomes  a 
substitute-on-wheels  for  all  male  social  clubs  and  neighborhood 
taverns.  It is  thus  no  surprise  that  even  car  pool  trips  of  more 
than  40  minutes  were  not  found  wearing.  Indeed,  women  seem 
to  be more affected  by  their husbands'  journey to work than the 
men themselves,  partly because the men cannot be with  the chil-
dren  during  the  preparation  of dinner and  perhaps  because  the 
men  take  the strain of a· long trip out on their wives.11 

Commutation  played  a  minor  role  in, the  parental  time  bud-
get,  however.  Two  thirds  of the  men  with  short 'work  trips  had 
more  time  for  the  children,  while  those  with  longer  trips  were 
unaffected,  and wives  reported  that men with  trips over 40  min-
utes  had  more  time  with  their  children  than  those  with  shorter 
ones.  Actually,  longer  hours  on  the  job  (often  required  by  the 
promotion which  financed  the purchase of the new house)  was  a 
more significant factor in preventing the 29  per cent of husbands 
who wanted more  time with  their children  from  finding  it. 

Fifty-seven per cent of the husbands-mainly the younger ones 
-sought more time with their wives and all  but one got it.  Only 
37  per cent of the wives wanted to be with their husbands more, 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

•  223  • 

but all  got  their wish.  Age  made  no  difference,  but once  again, 
the  former city  residents  felt  a  greater need  for  more  time  with 
their  men.  In  the random  sample as  a  whole,  about  40  per cent 
said  they  had  more  time  with  each  other  in  Levittown. 12  Short 
work  trips seem  to give  spouses  more  time  with  each  other,  but 
long ones do not deprive them of time, for there was no statistical 
association  between  people  who  reported  long  trips  and  those 
who reported less time with their spouses. 13 

Levittown  also  provided  more  opportunity  for  parents  and 
children to do things together;  nearly half the random sample re-
spondents  reported increased  joint family  activity 14  in  both  the 
first  and  second  interviews. 15  In  the  first  interview,  72  per  cent 
explained  that  fixing  up  the  house  and  the  yard  were  responsi-
ble;  by the second,  40  per cent pointed to new social  and recrea-
tional  opportunities.  When children were  old  enough  to  join  in 
shopping,  recreation,  and  visiting,  joint  family  activity  rose; 
when  they  became  old enough  to  prefer  peers,  it decreased,  and 
as  the effects of the house and community wear off, age is likely to 
be  the more important determinant of family  cohesion. 

Because the random sample had interpreted joint family activ-
ity as  referring to  parents and  children,  the  Philadelphians were 
asked,  "Do  you  and  your  husband  do  more  things  together  in 
Levittown  than  where  you  lived  before,  or  fewer  things?"  Al-
though 40 per cent reported more "joint couple activity,"  20 per 
cent  mentioned  a  decrease.  House  and  community activities  are 
again  significant  reasons  for  the  increase,  while  the reduction  is 
explained  by  age.  Newlyweds  find  children  distracting  to  their 
own relationship--fully 55  per cent of couples under twenty-five 
report a  decrease  in joint activity in  Levittown. And when older 
children join their peers, a cleavage is  created between  their par-
ents.  Husbands who are now working longer hours and traveling 
longer to work also mention  fewer shared activities, as  do profes-
sionals, the well educated, and Jews. 

Levittown seemed to have no effect on marital happiness,  how-
ever.  Only  about  20  per  cent  reported  an  improvement  in  the 
marital  relationship; 16  as  might be expected,  few  were  ready  to 
admit a  poorer marriage, and most just indicated it had remained 
about  the  same.  Older  couples  reported  the  least  change,  and 
among  the  Philadelphians,  low-status  ones  the  most  deteriora-
tion, but otherwise dass differences were negligible. The happier 
couples  credited  the  house,  particularly  additional  space  which 

•  224  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

reduced  :;etting in each other's way,  and home ownership, which 
encouraged  "maturity,"  reduced  petty  bickering,  and  increased 
contentment.  One woman  pointed  out,  "The house  keeps  me  so 
busy,  I  don't  have  time  to  nag him,  but  I'm more  content  here 
too."  But the  initial  lift to  the marital  relationship produced by 
the  house  and  ownership  lasted  only  until  the  novelty  wore  off. 
Indeed,  in  the second  interview,  the woman just quoted said  the 
marriage  had  returned  to  the  status quo before  Levittown:  "He 
has  become so  wrapped  up in community activities and his work 
that he  has  forgotten  his  family."  Commuting seems  to influence 
the marital relationship,  particularly for wives;  both joint couple 
activity  and  marital  happiness  are  affected  negatively  when  the 
wives  consider  their  husband's  commute  wearing.  The  men  do 
not  agree,  however,  getting along with  their wives  as  well  when 
the trip is wearing as  when it is not. 

Thus  the  interviews  suggest  that  the  suburban  critique  is 
wrong;  family  life  has  changed  relatively  little  for  the  majority, 
and  the  changes  are  mainly  improvements.  These  data,  the 
minimal  impact of the journey to work, and my observations also 
cast  doubt  on  the  fear  of  an  incipient  suburban  matriarchy.  Al-
though  Philadelphians  had  had  a  sizeable  journey  to work  even 
when  they  lived  in  the  city  and studies of urban  neighborhoods 
indicate that men are away  from  the house during working hours 
as  much  as  in  Levittown,  no critic has  yet  begun  to worry about 
urban  matriarchy.  Among  middle  class  families  in  Levittown, 
some  household roles  that were once  the  woman's monopoly are 
now shared,  but among the working class families, suburban hus-
bands were as  reluctant  to wash  the dishes  or look after the chil-
dren  as  they  had  been  in  the  city.  In  some  cases,  they  even  left 
lawn-mowing  to  the  women,  or  tried  to,  but  were  quickly  dis-
couraged by block social pressure. 

Much  of  the  popular  talk  about  an  emerging  matriarchy 
strikes  me  as  a  misreading  of  the  trend  toward  greater  equality 
between  the  sexes-a  middle  class  value  which  is  also  being 
adopted by many working class women these days-and the devel-
opment  of  more  shared  interests,  owing  to  increased  (and  in-
creasingly coeducational)  schooling for  women.  Yet  even  among 
highly  educated  Levittowners,  the  husbands  still  made  the deci-
sions,  and women still  threatened errant children with  "wait till 
your  father  comes  home."  There  were  some  domineering wives 
and henpecked husbands,  but they were considered as  deviant in 
Levittown  as  elsewhere.  Public  concern  about  matriarchy  is 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

•  225  • 

natural-at  least  among  men,  for  they  are  undoubtedly  losing 
some of the  power they  held  in the  past,  and  those who  must re-
linquish power usually phrase their complaints as social criticism. 
Family life  in  Levittown also  impressed me as  being no differ-
ent  from  that  in  other communities.  A  few  marriages  were  very 
happy,  and  a  few  very  unhappyY  The  latter  were  of  course 
more  visible;  during  my  three  years  of  research,  14  suicide  at-
tempts  took  place,  all  but  one  by  women  and  only  one  success-
ful.18  In  most  instances,  women  took  sleeping  pills  and  then 
called  the  police,  their  doctor,  or  their  minister  immediately, 
reversing  what  was  surely  an  impulsive  and  pathetic  cry  for  at-
tention.  Two  women  accounted  for  four  of  the  unsuccessful  at-
tempts.  About a  hundred  cases  of serious  domestic conflict made 
the  police  blotter,  usually  when  a  wife  called  for  protection 
against  a  violent  husband.  Seventy  families  contributed  to  this 
figure,  but  15  accounted  for  fully  half  of  it,  and  55  called  the 
police  only  once.  Conflicts  on  record  were  usually  among  work-
ing class families,  for  the middle class  uses  techniques of fighting 
that are not noisy or violent enough to merit official  intervention. 
Conversely,  I  suspect that the suicide attempts were more often a 
middle  class  method  of  coping  with  an  unhappy  marriage,  and 
the one woman who killed  herself left a  tragic  note to  this effect. 
These are extreme situations,  however.  Another assessment  of 
marital  life comes  from  a  survey  taken  in  1961  among a  random 
sample  of  100  Levittowners  regarding  a  family  service  agency. 
TweRty-six per cent said one was needed, 51  per cent were sure it 
was  not, and 23  per cent were uncertain. If one assumes  that peo-
ple  were  really  talking  about  their  own  marriages,  a  quarter 
expressed  the  desire  for  help.  Undoubtedly class  enters  the  pic-
ture;  one would  not expect working class  families  to resort  to an 
agency.  On  the  other  hand,  young  middle  class  families  might 
seek  an  agency  without  being desperate.  Survey  data  tell  little 
about  married  life  in  Levittown,  however,  and  observation  sug-
gests that the majority of marriages combine that mixture of bliss 
and bickering to be found everywhere. 

\, 

PATTERNS  OF  INDIVIDUAL  ADAPTATION:  SUBURBAN 
HAPPINESS  AND  FEMALE  MALAISE 

The literature of suburban criticism  abounds with references  to 
auburban malaise and anomie, but however colorful,  these  terms 
are not quite accurate.  In fact,  it would be more correct to speak 

•  226  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

of  suburban  happiness,  for  most  Levittowners  experienced  less 
depression,  boredom,  and  loneliness  after  the  move.  Even  so,  a 
minority, sometimes  up  to  a  third,  report  the  opposite,  particu-
larly  among  the  Philadelphians.  Occasionally  these  feelings  stem 
from  being  isolated  in  the  community,  but  usually  they  reflect 
more  general  problems  of  working  and  lower  middle  class 
women in contemporary society.  If there is  malaise in Levittown, 
it is female but not suburban. 

Morale  and Health 

Thirty-six  per cent  of  the  random  sample  spoke  of  improved 
morale  after  coming  to  Levittown  and  all  but 6  per cent  of  the 
remainder  reported  no  change. 19  Among  the  Philadelphians, 
however,  only  22  per cent· reported  a  better disposition,  and  31 
per cent  a  poorer  one  (among  the women,  the  percentages  were 
19  and  38)--one of  the  few  instances  in which  change  was  more 
negative  than positive.20  High- and low-status  urbanites and peo-
ple  under  twenty-five  were  unhappier  now,  and  only  those  over 
forty-five  raised  their morale significantly. 21  In both samples,  the 
improvement in morale could be traced mainly to  the new house 
and  yard,  and  the  greater  ease  in rearing  children,  producing  a 
feeling  most  often  described  as  "relaxation."  A  Philadelphian 
said, "In the city, I'd have all  that tension  being out with my son. 
Here I can let him go,  and if I want to do something I  can putter 
in  the  garden.  It  is  so  quiet  and  serene  here,  it just  makes  you 
relax." 

The  people  with  poorer  dispositions  fall  into  four  types. 
Young women who have  become  mothers  in  Levittown,  particu-
larly  those  who  worked  before,  find  it  difficult  to  be  full-time 
housekeepers  and  to  cope  with  the  children,  and  this  is  com-
pounded  by  the feeling  of being "stuck."  Without a  car or com-
patible neighbors,  there  is  no  respite  or  escape. 

A  second  group,  primarily working  class  women,  miss ~family 
and  friends  in  the  city  and  find  it  difficult  to  cut  their  ties  to 
them.  Among  the  random  sample,  more  neighbor  and  couple 
visiting  results  in  better  morale,  but  among  unhappy  Philadel-
phians it does not help, even for  women  who  have  found  a  close 
friend  in  Levittown.  The  problem  is  summed  up  well  by  one 
young working class  ex-Philadelphian:  "It's too quiet here, noth-
ing to do.  In the city you  can go downtown shopping, see  all  the 
people,  or  go  visit  mother.  If there  were  more  friendly  people 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

•  227  • 

here  it  would  be  better.  I  knew  more  people  the  first  year,  but 
also  I  didn't  have  any  kids-I  was  only  carrying  the  first-so  I 
could  go  downtown  and  see  mother,  and  the  days  would  go  by 
fast." 

Third, some Jewish  women, either more or less  educated than 
the  majority  or with  non-Jewish  husbands,  were  now  more  un-
happy.  One,  a  working class  woman  married  to  a  Catholic,  said, 
"Here  you  meet  people  only  through  organizations,  churches, 
and  clubs,  but we  are  not  organizational  types  and  I  don't care 
for  organizational  life."  A  better-educated  one  had  the  opposite 
problem:  ''I'd feel  better if  I  could  make  friends  with  people,  if 
the  women  here  were  more  sincere.  A  lot  of  them  here  like  to 
play cards and I don't, and there are a lot of gossip-mongers and I 
don't  believe  in  that.  Several  organizations are  bothering you  to 
join,  a  constant  annoyance  of  activities,  and  if  you  don't  join, 
they say you are a grouch, you lack community spirit." 

Last,  women  with  poor  marriages  and  with  husbands  on  the 
road or with long commutes suffer from  poorer morale, although 
their prime reaction  is  loneliness. 22  One woman pointed  out, "1£ 
you are alone here, you are alone.  In an apartment, you can walk 
out  the  door.  It's  OK  though,  when  my  husband  is  home.  But 
when he's not, then I feel  isolated." 

Changes  in  physical  health  were  minor,  and  reflected  those  in 
morale.  Eighteen  per cent of the random sample reported better 
health;  the  same  proportion,  poorer  health.  Among  the  Phila-
delphians,  the  percentages  were  9  and  17,  respectively. 28  The 
healthier people said  they were  now  less  tense,  the  more relaxed 
way  of  living  having  alleviated  colds  and  allergies.  For  random 
sample respondents, more sickness was usually a recurrence of old 
ailments,  but  the  Philadelphians  reported  new  complaints, 
mainly  colds,  allergies,  nervous  tension,  and  increased  weight. 
Their illnesses  were  probably emotionally caused;  half in  poorer 
health  also  reported  poorer  morale,  but  in  the  random  sample, 
even  sicker  people  had  improved  dispositions. 24  High- and  low-
status  Philadelphians  and  the  ')ery  young  felt  their  health  had 
deteriorated  most;  the  older  people,  that  it  had  improved  the 
most-the  same  groups  who  also  reported  poorer  and  better 
morale.  Some  Philadelphians,  especially  men,  said  they  became 
sick  over  financial  worries;  for  others,  particularly  lower-status 
and Jewish respondents,  loneliness and distaste for  suburban liv-
ing were involved. 

•  228  • 

Boredom 

THE  LEVITTOWNEBS 

The amount  of  boredom  in  Levittown  is  shown  in  Table  5· 
Although people may underreport,  40  per cent (about a  third of 
the  women  and  more  than  half  the  men)  are  never  bored  and 
only a  few  women  are  constantly so.  Boredom  does  not seem  to 
be a  serious  problem in Levittown.  Younger  people  experienced 
somewhat  more  boredom  than  older ones,  but  there was  no  pat-
tern  by  class. 26  Since  former  city  dwellers  reported  as  much 
boredom in their prior residence as  suburban ones,  the common 
idea  that  suburbanites  are  more  bored  than  city  dwellers  is  in-
accurate. 

TABLE  5 
AMOUNT  OF  BOREDOM  IN  LEVITTOWN  • 

AMOUNT OF 
BOREDOM 

"Almost every day" 
"A few times a month" 
"About once a month" 
"Less often than that" 
Never 

N 

l'.Ell.  CENT AEPOll1'l:SG 

Philadelphia 
Sample 

ll 

Random Sample 
First Interoiew  Second Interoiew 
]If  All  w  M 
w 
0 
4 
21 
6 
u 
.118 
11 
55 
(18) 

14 
24 
17 
43 
(42) 

6 
17 
55 
(18) 

All  w  M 
0 
8 
ll 
18 
17 
ll7 
18 
11.7 
11 
u 
11 
41 
ll7 
(44) 
(37) 

4 
15 
11.7 
211 

5 
67 
(18) 

11~ 
(26) 

33 
(24) 

llll 

21 

0 

All 
5 
ll4 
:!2 

9 
40 
(55) 

•  People were asked, "'We all get bored every so  often.  How often  do you  find 
yourself feeling  bored, having nothing to do,  or nothing you  want  to  do espe-
cially?  Do  you  feel  this  way:  almost  every  day,  a  few  times  a  month,  about 
once a month, or less often  t11an  that?" The never category was  not read  to  the 
respondents. 

About  a  third  of  the  bored  women  attributed  it  to  the 
menstrual  period,  poor health,  or a  periodic bad mood.  But two 
other  reasons  are  mentioned  more  often:  housework  and  being 
"stuck."  Some  women  complain  about  the  monotony  of  house-
work,  especially ironing, yet what  invites boredom most often is 
simply  "doing  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again."  This reac-

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

•  229  • 

tion  is  voiced  by women  impatient with  being only  housewives, 
but not yet able to see  themselves  in other roles,  for example,  in 
voluntary associations. 

The move  to Levittown  has  improved matters,  principally for 
the  random  sample,  for  51  per cent said  their  boredom  had  de-
creased  or disappeared,  33  per cent  reported  no  change,  and  16 
per cent,  that  it  had  increased  or  appeared  for  the  first  time. 26 
Among the Philadelphians,  51  per cent report no change;  27  per 
cent  (a  third  of  the  women)  report  an  increase;  22  per  cent,  a 
reduction.27 

The  reduction  in  boredom  is  explained  by  the  activities 
around  the  house  and  yard  and  the  increased  social  life.  Inter-
estingly enough,  the  house's  impact  on  boredom does  not disap-
pear  even  after  its  novelty  has  worn  off.  Joint  family  activity 
drops off,  but the house offers diversion even after three years.  As 
one  person  put  it,  "Ymt  start  trimming  the  lawn  or  pull  one 
weed, and then you go on to do the job right because you want it 
to  look  right,  and  the  time goes.  There's less  time  to  be  bored." 
Increased  boredom  was  concentrated  largely  in  the  Philadel-
phia  sample,  with  people  of  low  status,  those  under  twenty-five 
and  over  forty-five,  and  Jews  reporting  considerably  higher  in-
creases  and  smaller  decreases  than  others.  For  example,  70  per 
cent  without a  high  school diploma  felt  more  boredom,  as  com-
pared  to  20  per cent of  the college-educated.  There  is  little  pat-
tern  to  the increase.  Sometimes it is  caused  by  being kept in the 
house  by  weather  or children's  illnesses;  sometimes  it  is  a  more 
permanent  feeling  of  isolation,  either  because  there  is  not 
enough  housework  or  because  the  role  change  from  worker  to 
mother  has  proved  restrictive  and  less  interesting.  The  major 
complaint,  however,  was  "nothing  to  do."  Philadelphians  who 
find  Levittown dull report boredom more often, as  do those who 
do  not  belong  to  organizations  or  who  are  less  active  than  they 
had  been  in  the city.  Born-and-bred  city  people  are  bored  more 
than  those  who  moved  to  Philadelphia  in adulthood,  and so  are 
people who lived  wit~ their  parents  or  in-laws  or  miss  relatives 
and close friends.  Those who became organizationally active and 
some  who  increased  their  visiting  were  less  likely  to  become 
bored;  for  others  new friends  do not seem  to  be enough,  people 
who  felt  close  to  someone  in  Levittown  reporting  as  much  in-
crease  in  boredom  as  those  who  had  not  found  anyone. 28  Their 
problem  is  mainly  separation  from  their  Philadelphia  compan-

•  280  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

ions,  but also  the  loss  of what  one  might  call  the  "urban safety 
valve." As  one Philadelphian pointed out, "In the city I  was  able 
to go into town every once in a  while,  but here I  can't. I  get rest-
less  at  times,  fed  up.  Then  I  need  a  change,  have  to  get  out. 
Being with the kids all  the time builds up tension and you get rid 
of  it  by  going  out  and  away  from  them."  Of  course,  this  was 
accentuated  by  the  shortage  of  shopping  and  window-shopping 
facilities in Levittown at the time of the interviewing. 

If life  in  Levittown  really  produced  boredom,  one  would  ex-
pect an  increase  over  time,  but most  respondents  who  had  been 
bored when they first  came to Levittown reported a decrease two 
years  later,  and  only 5  and  8  per cent  in  the  two  samples  an  in-
crease. Of the Philadelphians initially not bored, however, 73  per 
cent say  they are now bored. They found Levittown very exciting 
at the start but now Jack activities and friends to keep them  busy. 
Once  the  novelty  wore  off,  they  became  disenchanted.  Two 
thirds of these women had been bored in  Philadelphia, however, 
and  the  early  months  in  Levittown  were  only  a  temporary 
respite. The move initiated boredom for  the remaining third and 
for  17  per  cent  of  the  men.  The  trend  to  less  boredom  with 
length  of  residence  is  supported  by a  study in  Levittown,  Penn-
sylvania.  Fifty-four  per  cent  with  two  years'  residence  were 
bored,  but  only  29  per  cent  with  four,  and  22  per  cent  with 
seven.  Of course,  the really  bored may  have  left  the community, 
but of those who stayed, only  18  per cent say they are bored more 
often now than when they first arrived.29 

Loneliness 

Loneliness  is  as  rare  in  Levittown  as  boredom.30  Table  6 
shows  that  only  about  20  per  cent  of  the  women  are  lonely  at 
least  a  few  times  a  month,  and  taking  underreporting  into  ac-
count, these can be thought "really lonely." Loneliness is  roughly 
similar in amount to  boredom, and the  two also overlap, mainly 
because  being  stuck  in  the  house  can  produce  both  feelings. 31 
Unlike  boredom,  however,  loneliness  strikes  all  kinds  of  Levit-
towners and does not vary with age,  class,  religion, or other char-
acteristics.  For example,  20 per cent of blue collar Philadelphians 
reported being lonely at least a  few  times a  month, but so  did 25 
per cent of professional ones.32 

The reason  for  this  unexpected finding  is  that  there are  three 
types  of  loneliness:  social,  which  develops  from  lack  of  friends; 

•  231  • 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 
familial,  which,  at  least  in  Levittown,  is  felt  by  women  cut  off 
from  their  parents  and,  more  important,  from  husbands  whose 
jobs  require  traveling,  long  hours,  or  such  preoccupation  with 
work  that  they  have  little  time  for  their  wives;  and  chronic,  a 
personal alienation above and beyond social  and familial  causes. 
The  three  types  can  strike  the  same  person;  indeed,  when 
familial  loneliness  is  not  compensated  for  by  social  life,  it may 
lead to the chronic variety. 

TABLE  6 

AMOUNT  OF  LONELINESS  IN  LEVITTOWN, 
WOMEN  ONLY  • 

AMOUNT OF 
LONELINESS 

"Almost every day'' 
"A few times a week" 
"A few times a month" 
"About once a month" 
"Less often than that" 

Never 

N 

PER  CENT  REPORTING 

Random Sample t 
Second I ntervicw 

Philadelphia 
Sample 

0 

4 
15 
22 
15 

44 
(27) 

ll 
5 
16 
14 
19 

43 
(37) 

•  Respondents  were  asked,  "In  a  new  community,  people  sometimes 
feel  lonely.  How  often  would  you  say  you  feel  lonely  here?"  All  cate· 
gories  with  the  exception  of  never  were  read  to  them. 

tIn  the  first  interview,  the  random  sample  respondents  were  asked 
only  if  tJ+ey  were  lonely  or  not.  Nineteen  per  cent  said  they  were 
lonely. 

· 

Of the  small  number of really  lonely in  both samples,  38  per 
cent  gave  reasons  which  suggested  social  loneliness  and  54  per 
cent,  familial.  As  might  be  expected,  no  one  admitted  chronic 
loneliness,  but  I  would guess  that not more  than  10  per cent of 
Levittown's women were in this condition.88  Fifty-seven per cent 
of  Philadelphians  who  had  lived  with  parents ·or in-laws  report 

•  232  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

being really lonely in Levittown; so do half the wives of salesmen 
and pilots, but only  12  per cent of those married to office and fac-
tory  workers. 8o~  Since  67  per  cent  of  wives  with  traveling  hus· 
bands and  only  35  per cent of the  others were  lonely  before  the 
move,  and  since  loneliness  does  not  vary  with  length  of  trip  to 
work, occupational absence  is  clearly at fault.  (I  should note that 
not all  salesmen  were  travelers,  and  more  subtle  psychodynamic 
factors  may  be  at  play  in  salesmen's  marriages.)  Improved social 
life  does  not reduce  this  type  of  familial  loneliness,  for  the  pro-
portion  lonely  is  as  high  among  those  visiting  more  as  among 
those visiting less. 

Almost  half  the  random  sample and  22  per  cent of the  Phila-
delphians  had  been  lonely  in  their  former  residence,  and  most 
seemed  to  have  suffered  from  social  loneliness.  Levittown was  a 
godsend for  them, for 70 per cent of the former and all of the lat-
ter  reported  less  loneliness  after  the  move.  One  Philadelphian 
said, "In the city,  if I  was alone,  I  stayed  home.  Here a  neighbor 
comes  over  to  talk.  In  the  city,  everyone  worked  and  people 
didn't  come  out and  talk."  In  other  instances,  husbands  are no 
longer  away  so  much,  or  work  shorter  hours.  For  the  random 
sample as  a  whole,  about a  third reported  that loneliness had set 
in or increased,  a  third  that it had decreased  or disappeared, and 
a  third  that  nothing  had  changed.  Among  the  Philadelphians, 
however,  only  22  per cent reported less,  and 43  per cent more.36 
The women  in  the  random  sample  are  not  seriously  bothered; 
none are  really lonely,  but in  the  Philadelphia group  more than 
half are, most of them with  familial loneliness.  Some  who  report 
being lonely in  Levittown for  the first  time are Jews who do not 
fit  into  the  Jewish  subcommunity,  being  more  or  less  educated 
than their peers or married to non-Jews. Most of the newly lonely 
are,  however,  low-status  people  (of  all  religions)  who  not  only 
miss  their families  in Philadelphia but also  have  trouble finding 
friends in Levittown. Even so, judging from  the reasons given for 
changes in loneliness, the husband's absence and separation from 
relatives  are  more  frequent  causes  of  loneliness  than  is  social 
isolation. 

Because  so  much  loneliness  is  familial,  it  does  not  decrease 
with length of residence and, in fact,  only becomes apparent after 
some  time  in  Levittown.  For example,  of those  not lonely  after 
six months  in  Levittown,  18  per cent of the random sample and 
55 per cent of the Philadelphia sample were lonely by the second 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

interview. Some had been seeing their families in the city or were 
busy  venturing  into  new  relationships  in  Levittown  at  first. 
Others  were  Jewish  women,  initially  quite  active,  who  realized 
after the organizational tasks  had been taken care of and sociabil-
ity  became  more  important  that  they  did  not  share  prevailing 
group  interests.  Conversely,  those  whose  initial  loneliness  was 
due to lack of social  life reported that it had been dispelled after 
two years in the community.as 

Because  so  many  lonely  Philadelphians  mentioned  missing 
people  from  the  city,  this  sample  was  asked  an  additional  ques-
tion  about  it.37  Altogether,  68  per cent  of  the  women  and  half 
the  men  had  "close  family"  in  Philadelphia,  particularly  the 
wives of blue collar workers,  Catholics,  Italians, Jews,  and previ-
ous  homeowners.  Two  thirds  saw  these  relatives  less  often  since 
they  had  moved;  15  per cent  saw  them  more, especially recently 
married women  who needed  their mothers once  they  themselves 
had children.  Of those who visit  family  less  often,  35  per cent of 
the women,  but none of  the  men,  feel  badly about  it.  (Whether 
or not they visit, none of the men, but 53  per cent of the women, 
miss  someone  in  the  city-mainly,  of course,  their  families.  Al-
though low-status wives do so  most often,  higher ones are not far 
behind.88)  Religion  and  ethnic  background  make  no difference, 
but  So  per  cent  of  the  women  under  twenty-five  and  the  same 
proportion of mixed  marriage  partners say  they  miss  their  fami-
lies. 

Over  time,  the  physical  distance  from  the  family  becomes  an 
emotional  one,  at  least  for  some,  46  per  cent  missing  their 
families  less  after  two  years  in  Levittown.89  Eighty-five  per cent 
of  these  women  have  met someone  else  to  whom  they  feel  close, 
72  per cent  having found  neighbors  and  the  rest  friends.  These 
"family substitutes" do not decrease  loneliness for,  in  this group, 
people  who &fill  miss  their  families  are  lonelier  than  those  who 
do  not,  but only  occasiqnally  so,  about  once  a  month. 40  Just  25 
per cent of the women who miss their mothers or parents want to 
move closer to them, but to other suburbs, and none wants tore-
turn  to  the  city  just  to  be  near  them.  Undoubtedly,  the  unani-
mous  failure  of  husbands  to  miss  their  relatives  or  in-laws  is 
partly responsible. 

My definition of real  loneliness (a  few  times a  month or more) 
may be exaggerated, and the resulting data may overestimate the 
extent  of  traumatic  aloneness.  In  any  case,  they  hardly  demon-

•  234  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

strate the alienation which the critics ascribe to suburbia. Indeed, 
suburbia clearly reduces alienation,  its abundant  social  life  even 
ameliorating  the  pains  of  chronic  and  familial  loneliness.  But 
there  is  also  that  third  of  the  population  for  whom  one woman 
spoke  when  she  said,  ''I'd  never  feel  lonely  no  matter  where  I 
was.  There are  always  nice  people  close  by whom  you  can  visit. 
And then there's the TV and radio. And besides,  I'm always busy 
and never have  time  to  be  lonely."  It may be  that cosmopolitans 
project  the  alienation  they  experience  in  American  society  onto 
suburbanites. 

Problems  and  W o"ies 

Another way of shedding light on family and individual  adap-
tation  in  Levittown  is  through  the  problems  raised  and  elimi-
nated  by  the  move.  The  random  sample  was  asked  to  describe 
new  and  old  problems;  since  some  respondents  seemed  hesitant 
to  talk  about  them,  the  interview  schedule  for  former  Philadel-
phians  added  a  question  about  old  and  new  worries,  which 
elicited  a  better  response. 41  Problems  and  worries  are  universal, 
about  6o  per  cent  reporting  the  former  and  93  per cent  the  lat-
ter.  Because  of  the  stigma  attached  to  problems,  the  proportion 
of worries is  probably more accurate. As  expected, low-status peo-
ple reported more problems than  higher-~tatus ones,  although all 
classes worried in equal  numbers. About 70 per cent of the prob-
lems  and  62  per  cent  of  the  worries  could  be  related  to  Levit-
town.  The  principal  irritant  was  family  finances,  second  was 
child-rearing, and third was illness. 42 

Seventy-two  per  cent  of  the  Philadelphians  and  half  the  ran-
dom  sample  suggested  finances  as  the  major  trouble  spot,  with 
furnishings,  heat bills,  and  the added wear and tear on  the auto-
mobile  mentioned  as  specifics.  Worries about  taxes were voiced 
also,  but less  often.  Obviously,  low-status and low-income  people 
(earning  under  $65oo)  worried  most  over  finances,  but  high-
income  ones  (earning  over  $gooo)  reported  financial  problems 
as often as  the rest-they just did not worry so much about them. 
Families  whose  income  decreased  or  remained  stable  after  the 
move worried too,  regardless of how much they earned, and poor 
Levittowners  in  large  numbers  said  they  had  not  had  financial 
worries  before  the  move. 43  Budgetary  troubles  create  other 
problems,  particularly  marital  ones.  As  one  blue collar  wife  ex-
plained,  "It's  money  that  causes  all  the  other  problems.  When 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

my  husband  and  I  quarrel,  it's  because  of  not  being  able  to  do 
things  and  have  things."  For  most  Levittowners,  however,  in-
creases in the cost of living created inconveniences and occasional 
arguments  rather  than  serious difficulties.  One comment is  typi-
cal:  "Living around here is  a  little higher than we  expected, and 
we don't have quite so much money to flash  around." 

Children,  too,  cause  problems  and  worries,  mostly  over  disci-
pli)le  and  school  performance.  Of  fourteen  discipline  problems 
reported  in  the  interviews,  half  could  clearly  be  traced  and,  of 
these, five  to  Levittown. They stem from  the attempt to maintain 
standards  in  the  face  of different  ones  among neighbors.  As  one 
mother put it,  "In a  community like  this,  they  have  lots  of chil-
dren who run wild,  stay up late at night. When I  caii  my daugh-
ter home to bed or supper, she does not want to come because her 
friends  are  out late."  Middle class  families  with  discipline  prob-
lems  complain  about  bad  influences  from  neighbors;  working 
class ones,  that their children· become "smart-alecks" as  they grow 
up.  Two Jewish  respondents  reported  difficulties  resulting  from 
the  pace  of  Jewish  life.  "The  children  are  oversocialized  here, 
and there are discipline problems-this is  new to Levittown," one 
said.  The other said,  "It takes  more time to raise children. They 
belong  to  more  clubs  and  we  have  to  take  them  from  place  to 
place."  School  problems  result  mainly  from  changing  schools, 
especiaiiy  when  a  child  moves  from  a  city  parochial  school  to a 
more permissive  public school.  Parental roles  have an  impact on 
the child as  well.  In  the case  of a  sociaiiy  isolated  Jewish  family, 
the  child seems  to  be lonely  too,  which  in  turn affects  his school 
performance.  Of  the  seven  school  problems  reported,  however, 
only two have developed since the move. 

Illness  is  mentioned third,  but ail  cases  were carryovers,  not a 
result  of  the  move,  as  were  three  cases  of  emotional  difficulties. 
The  two  cases  of  marital  difficulty  also  existed  prior  to  Levit-
town,  but  one  marriage  broke  up after  previous  economic  trou-
bles  were augmented  by  the  move.  Some  respondents  were  con-
cerned ab041t  job problems, and ex-servicemen or Transients who 
wanted  to  stay  in the community worried about finding work  in 
the area. 

While Levittown created new problems and worries,  it also re-
duced or eliminated some old ones. For about a third of the peo-
ple  in  each  sample,  old  problems -and  worries  disappeared  or 
were  tamed, while only  7  per cent of the random sample and  17 

•  236  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

per  cent  of  the  Philadelphians  reported  that  old  problems  had 
been  exacerbated.  The  latter  difficulties  were  financial,  where<~s 
improvements were  primarily in health and family  relationships. 
One  respondent  claimed  that  his  children's  asthma  had  "im-
proved  go  per  cent."  Better  family  relationships  were  credited 
largely  to  the  increased  space  in  the house.  One mother  pointed 
out,  "We were  terribly crowded;  now  I  don't  have  to  sit on  the 
boys anymore." Another woman said, "I was a golf widow before. 
My husband hasn't lost interest in golf,  but there are other things 
to  do.  We  used  to  argue  a  lot.  Now he  works  around  the  house 
and  we  don't argue."  Philadelphians  felt  they  had  escaped  from 
undesirable conditions in the city.  One mother summarized it, "I 
worry Jess  about the traffic, and kids running in the street. I don't 
fear  that the kids will  be picked up by strangers any more;  there 
is  better  police  protection  here."  Others  were  relieved  of  traffic 
noises, dirt, and living next to factories. 

Emotional  Disturbance  and  Mental  IllneBB 

Suburbia  is  purported  to  breed  mental  illness,  but  relevant 
data are hard to come by, especially  in a  new community without 
a  hospital  or  a  local  psychiatrist."  Although  I  talked  regularly 
with  doctors  and  ministers  about the  number of  nervous  break-
downs  and  people  referred  to  psychiatrists,  checked  police  rec-
ords  for  instances  of  repeated  marital  conflict  and  suicide  at-
tempts,  and  tried  to  learn  prior  histories,  most  of  the  resulting 
data are only estimates.  During the first  two years of Levittown's 
existence, while 3000 families were arriving,  I counted  14 suicide 
attempts,  15  families  who  appeared  more  than  once  before  the 
police  on  domestic  conflict  charges,  an  estimated  50  nervous 
breakdowns,  an  estimated  100  psychiatric  referrals  by  doctors,  a 
similar  number  of  cases  of  pastoral  counseling  judged  by  the 
ministers  to  involve  "serious"  problems,  and  an  estimated  50 
juvenile  delinquents  in  repeated  difficulties  with  the  police  or 
the school.  Comparisons to other communities are impossible be-
cause  of  the  nature  of  the  data  and  because  of  the  difficulty  of 
computing rates in a  town just being occupied, but the figures  do 
not  seem  alarming.  I  would  judge  there  is  no  more  mental  ill-
ness, at least of the kind that surfaces into statistics,  in Levittown 
than  in other communities, and certainly less  than in the cities." 
More  important,  of  16  case  histories  gathered  from  doctors, 
ministers,  and  the  police,  13  indicated  similar  emotional  dis-

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

turbances in former residences, and  in no case was  there any evi-
dence  that  the  problem  had developed  in or worsened  in  Levit-
town.  Indeed, most of these  people had come with the hope  that 
a  change of scenery might resolve  their emotional  problems.  For 
example,  two  women, one married to an alcoholic,  the other to a 
compulsive gambler,  persuaded their husbands  to move  to  Levit-
town,  but once  the novelty of the house and  of home  ownership 
wore off,  the old problems returned, and eventually both families 
moved out.  Needless  to say,  emotional  problems  resolved  by  the 
move  did  not  c.;ome  to  public  attention,  but  I  doubt  that  the 
move  could  have  solved  serious  disturbances.  Conversely,  it 
could-and did-alleviate emotional  problems created  by social 
isolation in the previous residence. 

Almost  all  emotional  difficulties  that came  to  light were  expe-
rienced  by  women,  and  among  these,  two  faxniliar  types  stand 
out:  the  working class  woman  cut off  from  her  parents  and  the 
wife whose  husband is  occupationally on  the road.  Among them, 
the ones who are also socially isolated  tend  to express  their emo-
tional  problems  visibly  and  publicly.  Nevertheless,  in  most  in-
stances  marital  conflict  is  also  present,  and  indeed,  the  women 
most  beset  by  breakdowns,  even  the wives  of salesmen, are  those 
with unhappy marriages.  A  happy marriage does  not assure  emo-
tional  equilibrium and marital difficulties are not necessarily the 
cause  of  the  trouble,  but  individual  problems  often  vent  them-
selves  in  marital  tension.  Nor does  the  preponderance  of female 
cases  mean  that the women are  the source of the difficulties,  but 
only  that  they  express  family  tensions  more  frequently  or more 
visibly.4 8  For a  man,  the  job  is  often supportive,  rewarding  him 
even if he is  emotionally disturbed, whereas for a  woman,  house-
hold and maternal functions  provide fewer  tangible rewards and 
more minute-to-minute  tension.  Being alone with small children 
seems to result in a kind of sensory deprivation for mothers, caus-
ing them  to  lose  touch with  their adult selves,  particularly when 
they are unduly isolated from the husband or other adults. When 
serious marital conflict develops,  the man may be more disturbed 
than the woman and may resort  to violence,  but she calls  the po-
lice,  and  it  takes  a  while  to  discover  who  is  actually  the  more 
troubled party. 

The  suggestion  that  mental  illness  has  nothing  to  do  with 
the suburbs may be surprising.  It contradicts not only the critics 
but some English studies which found unexpectedly high rates o( 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

treated and untreated mental illness, of all degrees of seriousness, 
in  new  towns, 47  and  American  research  in  suburbs  and  rapidly 
growing communities.48  These rates  are sometimes attributed  to 
the nature of suburban  life-falsely,  I  think. The suburbs-like 
the  English  new  towns-attract  young,  relatively  sophisticated, 
and  comparatively  better-educated  people  than  established  com-
munities.  As  a  result,  they  are  physically  healthier,  and routine 
anxieties  may  express  themselves  through  functional  illnesses 
more often than organic ones. A sophisticated population is  more 
aware of emotional  problems  and.  able to articulate  them,  and a 
new-town  population will undoubtedly include disturbed people 
who  came  to  the  town  to  cure  their  problems  or  at  least  escape 
from  the  scene  of previous disturbances.  As  a  result,  statistics  of 
treated and untreated cases  are  likely  to be  higher than in estab-
lished communities.49 

New suburbs also attract an unusually large number of socially 
mobile  people.  Downwardly mobile people  have  been shown  by 
many studies  to be  troubled  emotionally,  and  if  they come  to  a 
new community with  the  false  hope  of  improving  their lot  and 
find a majority of their neighbors upwardly mobile,  their difficul-
ties  may  only  increase.  Upwardly mobile people are occasionally 
beset by problems,  too,  and it is  perhaps no coincidence that the 
more  troubled  Levittowners  included working class  women who 
had  married  into  the  middle  class  or  had  left  a  cohesive  ethnic 
enclave.  Mobile people  make  considerable demands  on  commu-
nity  institutions  which  these  cannot  always  satisfy;  conversely, 
hyperactivity or social  isolation may drive troubled people to the 
breaking point. 

But  the notion  that  suburban  life  is  inherently  stressful  and 
dangerous for all its residents is simply inaccurate. The testimony 
of people  who  found  Levittown  more relaxing  than  their  previ-
ous residence, and my own observations about the relatively slow 
pace of community life, suggest that, if anything, stress is  reduced 
by the move  to suburbia.  If the stress  of organizational  life  is  as 
great  as  claimed,  it  touches  only  the  few  who  are  really  active, 
but most  such  Levittowners  were  already active  in  their  former 
communities, so  that Levittown did not create a  new strain.  The 
preplanned  founding  of  organizations  may  even  have  reduced 
the  pressure  of  newness  on  active  people.  Obviously,  stress  ex-
isted and continues to exist-as it does  in all human encounters-
but this does not make it inherently pathological. 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

The American  study which  found  increased  mental  illness  in 
suburbia was done  in an upper middle class area;  quite possibly, 
upper  middle  class  life  is  more  nerve-racking than  that  of other 
groups,  particularly  for  people  newly  arrived  at  that  status.50 
This  would  explain  the  high  stress  among  a  suburban  Jewish 
population in Toronto so well described by Seeley and his associ-
ates.51  Such people could be  found  in Levittown  as  well,  putting 
inordinate  pressure  on  their  children  to  perform  well  in  school 
and running themselves ragged in community activities. Yet  they 
are  not  typical  of  suburbia  nor  is  their  behavior  inherently 
suburban. 

Indeed, my findings suggest that the major sources of stress are 
not  to  be  found  in  the  community,  but  in  being  left  out  of  it, 
excluded from  activities and relationships of crucial  personal  im-
portance.  Social  isolation  is  the m~E!_!!L~ be it from 
spouse,  neighbors,  friends,  or  organizations.  Even  among  upper 
middle  class  and  Jewish  Levittowners,  those  who  suffered  were 
not  the  hyperactive  ones  but  those  excluded  from  activity,  and 
especially  those  who,  not  fitting  in,  were  extruded  by  their 
groups.  Conversely,  initially  isolated  people  who  became  active 
in  Levittown  were  less  troubled  than  before,  even  when  their 
activity was hectic and seemingly full of potential stress. 

Social  isolation  can  affect  anyone,  all  classes  and  ages,  and can 
be found  in any community.  It probably strikes  newcomers and 
mobile persons more often, because they are moving from  an old 
to a  new  way  of life and  may  not fit  in.  Levittown, where every-
body  was  a  newcomer,  reduced  this  kind  of  isolation,  but  the 
smallness and homogeneity of the population made it difficult for 
the culturally and socially deviant to find companions. Levittown 
benefitted  the  majority but punished a  minority with  exclusion, 
what Whyte called the "misery of the deviate."  But if Levittown 
increased  their  chances  of  mental  illness,  it  had  the  opposite 
effect on a much larger number. 

I  have  purposely  concentrated  on  mental  illness  rather  than 
mental  health  in  Levittown,  because  most current definitions of 
the  latter  include,  overtly  or covertly,  a  conception  of  the  good 
life which usua!ly equates mental  health with an idealized  upper 
middle class cosmopolitan culture and  implies that other ways of 
living are  potentially  illness-producing.  This bias  fails  to  distin-
guish what is different from what is  pathological  in other subcul-
tures;  and until  research  shows,  for  example,  that the restrictive-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

ness  and localism  of some kinds of working class  and lower mid-
dle  class  culture are  pathological,  it  is  impossible  to  accept  most 
current definitions of mental health. 

The  tendency to identify  the different as  pathological  is  at  the 
heart of  the suburban critique and  helps  to  account  for  the crit-
ics'  belief  that  suburban  life  is  undesirable.  Although  the  move 
to  the  suburbs  has  brought  about  many  positive  changes,  the 
critics  argue  that  these  are  spurious  and  the  suburbanites'  con-
tentment self-deceptive.  Because  the suburban way  of life  strikes 
them  as  intrinsically  dull,  its  sociability  unsatisfying.  and  its 
activities  boring,  they  believe  it will  inevitably  generate  consid-
erable ennui and mental illness in the future. 

There  is  no  evidence  to  back  up  these  predictions,  however, 
and  I  doubt  that  they  will  come  to  pass,  because  the  critics are 
not speaking of suburban conditions, but are,  again, making neg-
ative  judgments  about  lower middle  and working class  cultures 
based on their deviation from  cosmopolitan values.  Levittowners, 
not sharing these,  are not deprived of the  urban  pleasures of  the 
cultured cosmopolitan  since  they  did not  indulge  in these  pleas-
ures  even  when  they  lived  in  the  city.  Indeed,  none  who  were 
bored  in  Levittown  suggested  that  they  missed  what  cosmopol-
itans value  about  the  city.  On  the  other  hand,  alienation  from 
community life reported  by  some  highly  educated  Levittowners 
indicates that they share  the critics'  values.  As  it turns out,  then, 
the  critics  are  right  about  members  of  their  own  culture,  but 
wrong when they presume to judge and speak for the majority of 
Levittowners. 

References  to  suburban  malaise  also  express  the  critics'  reac-
tion  to novelty.  Suburbs  first  sprang  up around  American cities 
about a century ago,  but the talk about "suburban malaise" dates 
only  from  the  development  of  the  postwar  housing  develop-
ments.  Class  difference  intrudes  here  too,  for  at  first  suburbia 
(another  new  term)  was  accessible  only  to  the  upper  middle 
class.  The critics'  fears  arose  only when  lower-status  groups were 
able to  move  beyond  the city limits.  The critics seem  to be most 
threatened  by communities like  Levittowns which  are  a  new  so-
cial  invention.  In other countries, similar and equally inaccurate 
critiques are specifically directed at new settlements;  the English 
worry about "new-town blues," and the Japanese, about "Danchi-
byo," an ailment ascribed to brand new suburban projects called 
Danchi. 52  Of course,  the critics  are  not  the only ones  threatened 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

•  241  • 

by newness.  For example,  Canadian  journalists and government 
officials  told  hair-raising  stories  of  social  disorganization  and 
mental  illness among Eskimos  in an  Arctic  new  town,  but syste-
matic  anthropological  research  concluded  they  were  untrue." 

SOME  SOLUTIONS  TO PROBLEMS  OF ADAPTATION 

Although  only  a  minority  of  Levittowners  encountered  prob-
lems and although few  of these were distinctive to suburbia,  they 
still  need  to  be  solved.  One  is  the  women's  feeling  of  being 
"stuck"  in  the house.  One solution would  be separating mothers 
and  children  during  part  of  the  day  through  community-wide 
nursery  schools  or  day-care  centers.  However,  these  are  most 
often used by well-educated women,  who suffer  least from  being 
"stuck."  The  failure  of  such  schools  to  reach  the  women  who 
need  them most  is  only partly one of cost  (which  could  be dealt 
with),  for  many  lower  middle and working class  mothers are  re-
luctant  to give up their children liecause  it implies  that  they are 
poor  mothers.  If nursery  schools  were  attached  to  the  public 
school  system,  they  might be  less  reluctant,  but  they  would  still 
need  to  find  activities  of  enough  significance  to  justify  leaving 
their children  in someone's care.  Women with  these  feelings are 
often  also  ill  at  ease  in  organizations,  but  they  would  respond 
favorably  to  work  opportunities.  However,  jobs  for  women,  ex-
cept  as  teachers,  are  a~  rare  in  Levittown  as  in  other  suburbs. 
Still, many unfilled community posts exist. The schools could use 
teachers' aides:  the hospitals, nurses'  aides;  and libraries, govern-
ment  offices,  and  other  public  agencies  could  improve  services 
with  auxiliary workers.  Levittowners  might  accept  tax  increases 
that  would  result  in  employment  for  women,  especially  in  the 
form of four- to six-hour jobs, but most likely jobs will have to be 
created through federal  programs like those now being instituted 
to  hire  and  train  ."nonprofessionals"  to  work  with  the  city's 
poor.e• 

For many women,  downtown  shopping and  window-shopping 
opportunities  are  sufficient  to  overcome  physical  isolation,  but 
quick  and  easy  access  to  the city  is  now not available,  and some 
even  have trouble getting  to  the  Levittown  shopping center.  At 
the  time  of  my  research,  the  demand  for  public  transportation 
was  too low  to  encourage private  enterprise  to  provide full  serv-
ice,  and  the  only  solution  is  a  system  subsidized  either  by  mer-

•  242  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

chants  or  by  a  federal  mass  transit  program. 55  Stores  within 
walking  distance  that  can  function  as  informal  meeting  centers 
for  adults  as  well  as  teenagers  would  also  help,  but  these  would 
have  to  be  located  so  as  to  preclude  fears  of  homeowners  about 
decline  in  property  values,  which  accompany  the  entrance  of 
commercial facilities into the hearts of residential areas. 

The second  and more serious  problem  is  social  isolation.  Ade-
quate public  transportation to the city would ameliorate  the sep-
aration from  parents for former  Philadelphians, and so  would re-
duced  telephone  charges.  A  call  from  Levittown  to  the  city  is 
now  a  long-distance  one,  and  people  who  want  to  be  in  daily 
touch  with  their  families  run  up  monthly  phone  bills  of $2o  or 
more,  which  they  cannot  afford.  For  some,  the  only  solution  is 
either a  return to the city or a  parental move to the suburbs. The 
dislike  of  urban  living  and  the  husband's  opposition  to  being 
near in-laws  prevents the former;  the high cost of suburban hous-
ing for  older people who own  their homes in  the city or pay low 
rent  discourages  the  latter.  Suburban  low-rent  housing  for  the 
elderly  might  attract  some  parents,  but  many  want  to  maintain 
social  ties  in  the  city  or  need  a  central  location  that  puts  them 
close to children living in different suburbs. Some Philadelphians 
might  not  have  moved  to  Levittown  had  they  known  the  emo-
tional cost of leaving parents, but there is now no agency to make 
people aware of this possibility.  One cannot expect builders to do 
it,  but discussion  of  the  problem  in  the  mass  media  might  help. 
Coping with  the  husband's absence  for  occupational reasons  is 
more difficult, although when automation begins to make inroads 
into white collar jobs, it should be possible  to decentralize offices 
to minimize extended  traveling or to reduce the salesman's  terri-
tory  to  an  area  that can  be covered  in  a  day  or  two.  Sometimes, 
occupational  absence  is  only a  symptom,  however,  for  men  who 
are  uncomfortable  in  the  marital  relationship  may choose  a  job 
that requires traveling. This is  part of the more general  problem 
of  marital  strain.  Difliculties  caused  by  financial  worries  can  be 
reduced  by long-term,  low-interest loans  for  the  period when  the 
costs of raising a family are greatest, or better still, by adoption of 
the European system of family allowance grants.  It would be pos-
sible  to set higher income thresholds to discourage  potential  buy-
ers  who  cannot  really  afford  home  ownership  or  suburbia,  but 
neither builders nor banks can be expected to do so.  Higher FHA 
thresholds  could  be  required,  but  preventing,. young  families 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

from  realizing  the  living  standards  which  their  culture  is  con-
stantly  preaching  would  be  difficult  as  well  as  undesirable.  It 
would  be,  after  all,  tantamount  to  restricting  aspirations  and 
arguing that a  low-income family  is  not good  enough for  the sub-
urbs.  Extending the  recently established federal  rent-supplement 
program  to  the  purchase  of suburban  homes  would  be better. 

Other causes  of marital  difficulty  are  more  difficult  to resolve. 
Despite  the  social  isolation  of  partners  of  mixed  marriages,  it 
would  be  facile  to  discourage  marriage  across  religious  or  class 
lines, and wrong as well.  Nor can a return to the extended family 
be proposed or expected.  Even  if some  problems that face  young 
couples  (and  the  nuclear family  generally)  were  reduced  by  the 
presence  of  a  parent  or  other  relative  in  the  household,  new 
problems  would  arise.  The  Levittowners  who  previously  lived 
with  their  parents  all  reported  considerable  conflict  with  the 
older generation, and none wanted to move back with them.  One 
must accept  the reality of nuclear family  living, find  new  institu-
tions  and  functionaries  to  replace  the  parental  generation,  and 
help  people  learn  to  cope  with  the  strains  inevitable  to  the  nu-
clear  family.  Some  Levittowners  have  found  substitutes  among 
older  neighbors,  but  this  assumes  an  intimacy  in  the  neighbor 
relationship that is not often possible. 

Some  pressures  on  the  family  can  be  reduced  by  counseling, 
and  several  suburbs  have  developed  highly  successful  family 
counseling  agencies. 56  They  generally  attract  only  better-edu-
cated  families;  people  like  the  Levittowners  more  often  take 
their  problems  to  doctors  and  ministers.  Unfortunately,  both 
professions now treat counseling only as  a  sideline, and are often 
ill-trained  to  do  it  in  any case.  Levittown  patients  undoubtedly 
came  to  doctors  with  more  functional  and  "psychosomatic"  ill-
nesses  than  purely  organic  ones,  but  most  general  practitioners 
had  taken  only  introductory courses  in  psychiatry.  If these  doc-
tors were better trained. they could function  more adequately as 
counselors,  and  if  more  were  available,  they  could  spend  more 
time with each patient. Cost is a  fundamental  problem, however, 
and  until  Medicare  is  extended  to  young  families  and  to  those 
with emotional  problems as  well,  people will not get the counsel-
ing or the  systematic  psychotherapy  they  need.  Ministers do not 
charge  fees,  and  pastoral  counseling  is  likely  to become  a  more 
significant ministerial role in the near future. The churches must 
place more  stress on  this function, and a  builder like Levitt, who 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

gives  free  land  to  churches,  could  insist  that,  in exchange,  they 
appoint  ministers  who  are  properly  trained  in  pastoral  coun-
seling. 

Nevertheless,  family  counseling  agencies  should  attempt  to 
reach  working and lower  middle  class  clients.  They need  Medi-
care  or  other  public  support  to  extend  their  activities,  enlarge 
their staffs,  and make  their services less expensive, but they must 
also  reorient  themselves away from  upper middle class  culture.  I 
recall a visit to an agency in another Levittown;  it was  furnished 
in  Danish  Modern, with  The  New Yorker  and  Time magazines 
as reading materials, and classical music on the hi-fi system-thus 
effectively  telling  potential  clients  it was  an  upper  middle  class 
agency  before  they  even  got  in  to  see  a  counselor.  Counseling 
techniques  need  redesign  as  well,  to  provide  the  kinds  of  help 
acceptable to working and lower middle class clients.  Psychother-
apy  may  be  useful,  but  when  marital  conflicts  result  from 
financial  difficulties,  the  best  solution  is  a  loan;  when  the  prob-
lems  are  social,  it  is  to  help  clients  find  compatible  people. 
Psychoanalytic  methods  need  revamping  to  make  them relevant 
to  clients  less  trained  in  self-awareness  than  the  upper  middle 
class,  and  agencies  must  place  less  stress  on  professionalism,  in-
stead using the kinds of people and techniques that neighbors do 
when they provide therapy to each other across a  morning cup of 
coffee.  More  counselors  should  share  the  clients'  culture,  and 
more use should be made of the nonprofessional,  trained in pro-
fessional  techniques  but  able  to  combine  these  with  traditional 
nonprofessional  solutions  familiar  to  the  client  and  relevant  to 
his  situation. 57  Until  people  stop  treating  marital  problems  as 
shameful and counseling as a sign of defeat, agencies will have to 
be located outside  the  communities they serve. A  greater empha-
sis  on  children's  problems  would  also  help,  not  only  because 
many families have them, but also because parents are more will-
ing  to  bring children  in  for  treatment and can  be  persuaded  to 
accept  help  themselves  once  they  realize  their  own  role  in  the 
children's difficulties. 

The final  source  of  problems  is  social  isolation from  compati-
ble people.  Meeting people is easier in a new community than in 
an  established one, yet it remains difficult for  people who cannot 
find  the  right  ones,  are  unable  to  join  organizations,  or  suffer 
from  a  shortage  of  compatibles  in  the  community.  The  first 
group and  perhaps  the  third  can  be  helped  by developing local 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

•  245  • 

publications which describe organizations not just by their activi-
ties but also by the kinds of people who belong-thus institution-
alizing a  function  often performed by  the grapevine. The second 
group  might  be  aided  by  the  formation  of  small  social  clubs, 
modeled on the coffee-klatsch  or the fellowship  groups of funda-
mentalist Protestants,  both of which serve  people with culturally 
based  difficulties  in  making new  friends.  The  third  group  must 
be aided  in  finding  compatible  people  outside  the  community; 
they  might also  be encouraged  to help old  friends  from  the  city 
to  move  to  their  suburb,  possibly  with  financial  incentives  pro-
vided  by  the builder.  Some  builders have  employed social  work-
ers  and community organizers  to  function  in what Gutman calls 
"integrator" roles,  and  these could  be helpful  in reducing social 
isolation provided they do not act as  front men for the builder to 
stifle complaints about the houses. 58 

None of these  proposals will  help  people who define  compati-
bility  by  ethnic  or  religious  criteria  or  those  who  suffer  from  a 
real shortage of compatible people that cannot be ameliorated by 
communications  devices.  Here,  perhaps  the  only  solutions  are 
negative  or  positive  methods  of  tenant  selection.  The  former 
would discourage purchasers whose social  life and emotional  sup· 
port depend on people not now living in the community, by tell-
ing  them  that  they  can  expect  to  be  lonely.  The  latter  would 
make  sure  that  cultural  and  social  mmorities  come  in  sufficient 
numbers to assure  them of social  ties.  One way of doing this is  to 
announce  in  advance  that  ethnic  and  religious  facilities  will  be 
available;  Levitt  did  this  in  order  to  attract  Jewish  buyers. 59  A 
builder could  even  encourage such  minorities  to  buy as  a  group 
by advertising  his  development  in  their  publications  and  giving 
discounts  to  groups  of  significant  size,  without,  however,  either 
helping or preventing them  from  living next door to  each other. 
These proposals would exen  increase  the diversity  of  the com-
munity and achieve  the  planner's aim  for  balance,  not  to  dupli-
cate  urban cross  sections _based  on  statistical  artifact  but  to  pro-
mote  happier  lives.  For  the  people  concerned,  however,  homo-
geneity would be increased and ethnic assimilation inhibited, but 
I  would  argue  that  involuntary  heterogeneity  and  assimilation 
policies are rarely effective,  and  in a  community like  Levittown, 
many opportunities exist  for  those  who  want diversity  and  free-
dom from ethnic tradition. 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

NOTES 

1.  On matriarchy see  Duhl; on mental illness,  Gordon,  Gordon, and 
Gunther.  Yet  another  critic,  Wyden,  eschews  matriarchy,  but 
blames  the  suburbs  for  producing  children  that  dominate  their 
parents. 

2.  The  interview  questions  assumed  that  boredom,  loneliness,  etc., 
existed,  and  asked  respondents  to  estimate  their  own,  requiring 
them  to  volunteer  if  they  were  never  bored.  Comparisons  with 
the  former  residence  similarly  asked  whether  there  was  more  or 
less  boredom,  etc.,  in  Levittown,  forcing  them  to  volunteer  if  it 
had  remained  the  same.  They  did  not  hesitate  to  do  so,  and 
probably did not underestimate seriously  the  amount or increase 
of  boredom. 

3·  Eighty-three  per  cent  of  them,  but  only  20  per  cent  of  the  sub-
urban  and  small-town  respondents,  wished  husbands  to  be  with 
children more often. 

4·  I;or the sample as a  whole, 52  per cent of the wives  said  their hus-
bands were spending more time with the children, 11  per cent less, 
and  37  per cent the same. 

5·  For  the random  sample,  the median  trip decreased  from  36  min-
utes to 35· Twenty-nine per cent reported a  short trip; 34 per cent 
a  medium  one;  26  per  cent  a  long  one;  and  11  per  cent  a  very 
long one. 

6.  Among the random sample,  42  per cent experienced an increased 
commute,  45  per cent  a  decreased  one. The median  increase  was 
15  minutes;  the median decrease,  28. 

7·  Random sample respondents with an increased work trip also trav-
eled  a  median  45  minutes  now,  but  44  per  cent  traveled  4o--59 
minutes, and 19 per cent an hour or longer. 

8.  Among men with medium-length trips,  17  per cent liked it,  12  per 
cent  disliked  it,  55  per  cent  "don't  mind"  it,  and  16  per  cent 
"don't care one way  or the other."  For those  reporting long  trips, 
however,  only  3  per cent  liked  it,  30  per cent  disliked  it,  47  per 
cent  "don't mind,"  and  20  per  cent  "don't  care."  For  men  with 
very long trips, the percentages were 3, 44, 42,  and  11  respectively. 
The  proportion  of  dislikes  rose  from  15  per cent  among  people 
with  3o--3g-minute  trips  to  32  per  cent  with  4o--45-minute  trips. 
g.  However,  75  per cent of  the  Philadelphians  drove  their own  car, 
and only 20  per cent  belonged to a  car pool. Six  per cent used the 
bus, but many employed women, whose  response was  not studied, 
used it to get to work. 

10.  Professionals  and  intellectuals  who  work  in  solitude  have  more 
privacy,  and  since  time  is  their  scarcest  resource,  probably  find 
driving  to  work  a  boring  and  unnecessary  expenditure  of  time. 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

•  247  • 

Among  the  Levittowners,  half  the  professionals  and  white  collar 
workers,  but  only  29  per  cent  of  the  blue  collar  workers,  found 
driving  40  minutes  or  more  to  work  wearing.  Moreover,  profes-
sionals and white collar workers  reported longer  commutes,  both 
before  and  in  Levittown,  than  blue  collar  ones.  These  findings 
suggest why planners have been more anxious about the suburban 
journey to work than many of the people for whom they are plan-
ning. 

11.  For  a  similar  finding  see  Blood  and  Wolfe,  p.  172. 
12.  Thirty-seven per cent of the wives  had more  time  with  their hus-
bands,  13  per cent,  less,  and half,  the same.  For the  husbands,  the 
percentages  were  4,  6,  and 50 respectively. 

13.  Eighty per cent of the wives whose husbands have short work trips 
report spending more time with them,  as  compared to  20 per cent 
and  33  per cent of those  whose  husbands have  medium  and  long 
trips.  The husbands who report more  time  with  their wives  have 
shorter work trips since the move. 

14.  The question  was  worded,  "Does your family  do  more  things  to-
gether in Levittown than where you lived before, or fewer  things?" 
Although  the  interviewer did  not  suggest  that  more  joint family 
activity  was  desirable,  respondents answered as  if it were. 

15.  In  the  first  interview  43  per cent reported  more,  2  per  cent  less, 
and 55  per cent the same.  In the second,  the percentages  were 45, 
10,  and  45· 

16.  The interview question read, "How do you  and your husband (or 
wife)  get along in  Levittown,  better  than  where  you  lived  before 
or not as  well?"  In  the  random sample,  23  per cent  reported  im-
provement, 3 per cent deterioration, and 74 per cent no change; in 
the  Philadelphia  one,  the  figures  were  20,  11,  and  69  per  cent 
respectively. 

17.  Comparative  studies  of  urban  and  suburban  marriages  surveyed 
by  Ubell found  little difference  in marital  happiness  when  social 
and economic variations  between  suburbanites  and  city  dwellers 
were controlled. 

18.  Since suicide is  a crime in  New Jersey, attempts must be reported 
to  the  police,  and  the  number appearing on  the  police  blotter is 
probably  accurate. 

19.  People were asked whether their "disposition or state of mind had 
gotten better, worse  or stayed  the same since  they moved  to Levit-
town." 

20.  Among  the  random  sample,  34  per  cent  of  the  women  reported 
better morale,  11  per cent,  worse,  and 55  per cent,  no change.  For 
the  men,  the percentages were  39,  o,  and 61  per cent respectively. 
Among  the  Philadelphia  men,  28  per cent  said  their  morale  was 
better,  17 per cent, worse, and 55  per cent, no change. 

11.  Twenty  per  cent  of  working  class  Philadelphians  were  happier, 
but 40 per cent were unhappier. In a  predominantly working class 
English  new  town,  19  per  cent  reported  better  "general  fitness," 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

12  per cent,  worse,  and 68  per cent,  no  change.  About  the  same 
proportions  obtained  for  ability  to  sleep,  but  30  per cent  had  a 
better  appetite  and  only  6  per  cent  a  poorer  one.  Taylor  and 
Chave, p.  39· 

22.  The men's disposition  is  not affected  by  a  longer  work  trip. 
23.  In  the  working class  English  new  town,  26  per  cent  were  now  in 
better  health,  14  per  cent  in  poorer.  Taylor  and  Chave,  p.  38. 
Among Philadelphia working class  respondents  in  Levittown,  the 
proportions  reporting  change  were  about  the  same,  21  per  cent 
reporting better health and  the same  number poorer. 

24.  "Nervous" English new-town residents also reported poorer health 

than  the rest.  Taylor and Chave,  pp.  55-56. 

25.  Among the  Philadelphians,  45  per cent of  the  well  educated  and 
57 per cent of the least educated, and 6o  per cent of the blue collar 
workers  reported  some  boredom;  16,  36,  and  20  per  cent  were 
bored  at  least  a  few  times  a  month.  The  English  working  class 
new-town survey distinguished only between the absence and pres-
ence of boredom,  and  found  38  per cent were  bored,  with  no dif-
ference  between  the  sexes.  Taylor  and  Chave,  computed  from 
Table 33· p. 66. 

26.  The  group  reporting  no  change  includes  31  per  cent  who  were 
never bored, either in Philadelphia or Levittown;  among the ran-
dom  sample,  the  percentage  is  23. 

27.  In  the random sample,  19  per cent of the women and  12  per cent 
of  the  men  report  new or  increased  boredom;  for  57  and  41  per 
cent,  respectively,  it  has  decreased  or  disappeared.  Among  the 
Philadelphians,  32  per cent of the women  and  17  per cent  of  the 
men  say  they  are  more  or  newly  bored;  30  per  cent  and  5  per 
cent,  respectively,  say  they  are  less  or no longer bored. 

28.  Although  6o  per  cent  in  this  group  who  do  less  couple  visiting 
are  more bored now,  so  are  38  per cent of those  doing more,  and 
44  per  cent  of  those  doing  more  neighbor  visiting.  However,  a 
quarter of  those  who  found  someone  spoke  of  less  boredom,  but 
none of those unable to find  someone. 

29.  Pierson's  study showed  that So  per cent  reported  no  change,  and 
the  general  pattern  did  not  vary  with  length  of  residence.  The 
kinds of  people  who  are  bored  and  the  r~asons they  give  are  the 
same  as  in the  newer Levittown.  Only well-educated  women com-
plain  about  boredom  more  than  in  Levittown,  New Jersey,  per-
haps because they are more isolated in a  community with a  larger 
working class  population. 

30.  Only women were asked about loneliness, since  the first  interview 
had  shown  that  none  of  the  men  felt  lonely.  I  do  not  know 
whether they  were  reporting accurately  or refusing to admit  to  a 
feeling  associated  with women. 

31.  The  question  on  loneliness  appeared  in  a  different  part  of  the 
interview schedule  from  the one on  boredom  to  prevent overlap. 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

In  the  random sample,  6o  per cent of  those  lonely  a  few  times  a 
month  or  more  are  also  bored  that  often,  and  vice  versa.  Only 
38  per cent  of  bored  Philadelphians  are  lonely,  and  70  per  cent 
of the "never bored"  are at least occasionally  lonely. 

32.  The  English  new-town  survey  found  26  per  cent  of  the  women 
lonely,  boredom  also  overlapping  with  loneliness.  Men  were  as 
often  bored  as  women,  but reported little  loneliness.  Taylor and 
Chave,  computed from  Table 33  and pp. 66-67. 

33·  This  is  purely  a  guess,  but  of  the  nine  women  in  the  random 
sample  lonely  before  Levittown  and  still  lonely  now,  one  was 
lonely  a  few  times  a  week,  and  four  more  a  few  times  a  month. 
The first  would  represent  3  per cent of  the  total  sample,  the  lat-
ter  15  per  cent,  but  it -is  questionable  whether  people  who  are 
lonely  that  infrequently can  be called  chronic  cases. 

34·  In the random sample, 44  per cent of salesmen's and pilots'  wives 
and none of office  and factory  workers'  said  they were  lonely. 
35·  In  both  samples,  the  35  pe~ cent  reporting  no  change  said  they 

had  never  been  lonely  in  either residence. 

36.  Fifty-eight  per cent of the  random  sample  and 41  per cent of the 
city  one  said  they  had  been  lonely  the  first  six  months,  but  they 
all  reported  less  loneliness  after  two  years.  Interestingly  enough, 
when  they  were  first  interviewed,  only  19  per cent  of  the  former 
said  they  were  lonely,  although  after  two  years,  58  per  cent  re-
membered being lonely  at the start.  Evidently,  loneliness was  felt 
less  while  it  was  actually  being  endured,  perhaps  because  many 
people  shared  it,  perhaps  because  standards  for  loneliness  had 
risen  in  the  meantime. 

37·  The  question  was,  "Did  you  have  any  close  family,  I  mean  rel-

atives you were really close  to, where you lived before?" 

38.  Sixty  per  cent of  the  least  educated  and  67  per cent  of  the  blue 
collar  wives  miss  someone,  but  so  do  53  per  cent  of  the  better 
educated, and 57 per cent of the white collar wives.  Wives of pro-
fessionals  do not miss  their families,  however. 

39·  Thirty-nine  per  cent miss  them  as  much,  and  15  per cent,  more. 
40.  Sixty-eight  per cent of  the  women  with  close  relatives  in  the  city 
are lonely in Levittown, as compared to 34  per cent without them, 
but  those  who  miss  relatives  are  no  lonelier  than  those  who  do 
not miss them. People who now miss  their families more than they 
did  at  the  start  are  lonelier  than  those  who  now  miss  them  less 
or no more than before. 

41.  People  were  asked,  "Making  a  home  and  raising  a  family  some-
times brings problems such as illnesses, discipline problems, school 
problems,  marriage  problems,  job  or  money  problems,  and  the 
like.  What problems  have  you  and your family  experienced  since 
you  moved  to  Levittown?"  The  Philadelphians  were  also  asked, 
"What  things  have  you  worried  about  more  since  you  moved  to 
Levittown?" 

•  250  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

42.  In  the  English  new  town,  only  33  per cent  reported  problems,  fi. 
nancial ones being mentioned most often and illness second.  Tay· 
lor and  Chave,  computed  from  Table  38  and  pp.  77-78. 

43·  A  quarter  of  Philadelphians  with  rising  incomes,  but  two  thirds 
of  those  with  decreasing  and  55  per cent  of  those  with  stable  in-
comes,  worried  over  finances. 

44·  The most explicit statement of  this charge is  in Gordon, Gordon, 

and  Gunther. 

45·  In  the English new town,  33  per cent of the adults reported "sub-
clinical neurotic symptoms," and 14  per cent more were treated by 
general practitioners and psychiatrists.  Taylor and Chave,  p.  166. 
These rates are lower than reported for cities;  a  New York survey, 
for  example,  found  almost  So  per  cent  of  the  population  beset 
with  psychiatric symptoms ranging from mild to serious. See Srole 
et al. 

46.  English  studies  also  report  more  emotional  difficulties  among 
women  than  men.  See  Martin,  Brotherston,  and  Chave;  Taylor 
and Chave,  p.  125. 

47·  Martin,  Brotherston,  and  Ci}ave.  A  later  study  concluded,  how· 
ever,  that there were no differences in the number reporting "ner-
vous symptoms" in an old town, a new town, and a  new dormitory 
suburb.  See  Taylor and Chave,  p. 49· 

48.  The Cordons  found  a  higher incidence of emotional disorders  in 
newly suburbanizing counties than in nearby rural areas.  Gordon 
and Gordon;  and Gordon, Gordon,  and Gunther. A  study of fifty 
Massachusetts  communities by Wechsler found  that rapid growth 
resulted in significantly higher rates of hospitalized depressive dis· 
orders and suicide. 

49·  Martin, Brotherston, and Chave found mental illness and psycho-
neurotic symptoms highest among newly arrived residents and the 
old people. Taylor and Chave (p.  125)  found them  highest among 
the latter.  Psychologists  active  in American  suburbs have  also ob· 
served "post-occupancy depression," e.g., in Urban Studies Center, 
pp.  13-14,  but I  saw  little  of it in  Levittown.  If it  had  occurred, 
one would expect the  random sample  to have reported lower mo-
rale in the first  interview than in the second, but it did not. 

50.  The  Cordons  contrasted  the  suburbs  with  an  agricultural  com-
munity  which  seemed  more  ideal  than  real,  and  their  findings 
may  show  only  that  suburbs  for  the  upwardly  mobile  are  more 
stressful  than  static  but  affluent  rural  areas.  This  critique  is  de· 
tailed in Gans (1962c). 

51.  Seeley, Sim,  and Loosley,  Part II  passim. 
52.  The  "new-town  blues"  are  analyzed  critically  by  Thomas.  For  a 

study of the Danchi, see  Hoshino. 

53·  See  Honigmann. 
54·  See,  e.g.,  Pearl  and  Riessman. 
55·  Levittown's  internal  public  transportation  is  better  than  most, 

Family  and  Individual  Adaptation 

•  251 

• 

thanks to a  "jitney" system which goes  to  the  main shopping cen-
ter every  half hour. 

56.  Urban Studies Center,  pp.  16-27. 
57·  This  role  is  described  in  detail  in  Reiff  and  Riessman. 
58.  The emotional difficulties of the move  and prospects for  reducing 
them  are discussed  in  Urban Studies  Center,  and  by  Gutman. 
59·  He identified a site for a synagogue on the community map before 
the  community  was  occupied  and  before  any  plans  for  a  Jewish 
congregation  had  been  made.  Jewish  buyers  were  thus  told  that 
the Jewish  population  would  be  large  enough  for  a  temple,  and 
it became a  self-fulfilling  prophecy.  Of course,  Levittown  also  at-
tracted  Jews  because  the  builder  is  Jewish,  for  many  seem  to 
choose houses built by  their coreligionists when they can. 

Chapter Eleven 

THE  IMPACT  OF 
THE  COMMUNITY 

D 

D 

D 

D 

CRITICS  OF  SUBURBAN  LIFE  ASSUME  THAT  THE  UNDESIRABLE  FEA-
tures of life beyond  the city limits are  produced  by behavior and 
attitude changes people undergo  when  they move  out there, and 
thus  they conclude  that  it  is  necessary  to  do away  with  or trans-
form  the suburbs if American civilization is  to be preserved.  City 
planners assume  similarly  that  the  community creates a  negative 
impact  on  people,  and  propose  policies  for  a  "well-planned" 
community  that will  produce more desirable  behavior.  By  "com-
munity"  the  planner  means  the  "physical"  community;  the  ar-
chitecture,  site  layout,  transportation  system,  and  array  of  com-
munity  facilities  must,  he  argues,  be  altered  through  a  master 
plan  that  will  then  improve  the  social  environment. 

A  number of sociological  studies  have  effectively  questioned 
the  amount  of  change  that  results  from  the  suburban  move. 1 
Consequently, I have tried to go one step further:  to find out who 
is  actually changed by the move and how, and which sources and 
agents within that complex mixture of physical, economic, social, 
and  political  components  we  call  "the  community"  create  the 
change and therefore its  impact.2  By  sources,  I  mean such  causal 
factors  as  the move from  apartment to house or from city to sub-
urb,  as  well  as  Levittown's  social  structure.  Unless  the  real 
sources can  be isolated,  effective  policies for  altering and improv-
ing  the  community cannot  be  formulated.  In  this  connection,  I 
proposed  in  the  Introduction  that  change  could  be  either  in-

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  253  • 

tended or unintended, the former resulting from  the reasons and 
aspirations for  moving to  the suburbs, the latter developing after 
people  move  out,  and  therefore  traceable  to  the  community  it-
self.  Intended changes. can  be  satisfied  or  frustrated  in  the  com-
munity, but since their origin lies  elsewhere,  their elimination-
if that is  desired--<:an come only by altering people's aspirations 
or creating better solutions for  existing aspirations.  Unintended 
changes  can  be  dealt .with  by  intervention  in  the  community, 
however,  provided  their  sources  are  in  the  community  and  are 
not  outside  ones  such  as  the  national  economy,  or  extraneous 
ones  such  as  the  impact of children's ages  on  family  cohesion. 

I  must repeat that the data are based on small samples and can-
not  be  considered  statistically significant.  Nevertheless,  the  find-
ings are valid, because they often fit  into a  pattern. Levittown has 
created similar changes for similar kinds of people, and these can 
be attributed to a  limited number of sources, some related  to the 
community,  many  unrelated. 

GENERAL BEHAVIOR  CHANGE 

The overall  amount  of change  after the  move  to  Levittown  can 
be  estimated  from  the  fact  that  three  fourths  of  both  samples 
mentioned  one  or  more  changes  in  their  lives. 3  Many  changes 
were  intended:  62  per  cent  of  those  reported  in  the  first  inter-
view  with  the  random  sample,  51  per  cent  in  the  second.  Pre-
occupancy aspirations  were  realized  as  well,  since  86  per cent of 
the  random  sample  achieved  the  changes  it  had  desired.  How-
ever,  48  per  cent  of  those  not  wanting  any  change  also  experi-
enced some, suggesting the emergence of unintended effect. 

In  the  first  interview  the  most  change,  as  well  as  the  highest 
proportion  of  intended  change,  was  reported  by  previous  city 
dwellers,  apartment  dwellers,  and  renters.  Suburbanites,  small-
town residents, and owners encountered not only less  change but 
less  intended change. This finding can be explained by the kinds 
of changes people reported. Early intended ones were mainly the 
increased  morale  stemming from  home  ownership  and  the  satis-
factions  from  increased  visiting,  which  were  of course  principal 
moving  reasons  for  urbanites,  but already  familiar  experiences 
for  former  suburbanites.  The  latter  therefore  reported  more 
unintended change. 4  High-status  people reported  change  and in-
tended change more often  than low-status  people;  the latter had 

•  254  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

perhaps  thought  less  specifically  about  the  future  and  were 
surprised  by  unexpected  effects.  As  one  working  class  Levit-
towner put it: 

We  didn't  know  before  we  moved  here  that  we  would 
entertain  more,  go  out  less.  Not  that we  were boozehounds 
before,  though.  Not  that  we  can't afford  to go  out;  we  just 
don't want to.  We have a new house and want to keep it up 
nice;  this  is  not work but enjoyment.  I've never been more 
content.  In  the  city,  we  looked  forward  to  going  to  the 
shore;  here my mind is  occupied all  the time.  Over there,  if 
she  asked  me  to  wash,  paint,  I'd  throw  my  things  at  her; 
here  I  do  it  . . .  I  even  gave  up  fishing  here.  Working  in 
the  yard  is  just  like  fishing,  so  relaxing.  I  have  more  pep 
here than in Philadelphia. 

By  the second  interview  former  city residents  report  the  most 
unintended change, class  differences have vanished,  and even  the 
people  who  had  thought  a  lot  about  their  life  in  Levittown  be-
fore  arrival  now  report more  unintended than  intended change. 
The major unintended effects  are  increased organizational  activ-
ity  and  more  visiting  (half  the  respondents  mentioning  the 
former,  14  per cent the latter),  but 25  per cent are now negative 
ones--not having enough  friends  or missing  parents back home. 
The principal  intended  changes  were,  as  before,  the  satisfaction 
of  the  house  and  more  visiting.  Even  so,  when  it  comes  to  the 
source  of  change,  67  per  cent  is  now  attributable  to  the  social 
structure  of  the  new  community  and  only  25  per  cent  to  the 
house. 

Women reported more change, and more of the intended vari-
ety than men did, in both interviews, probably because they were 
more interested in the house to begin with. The men were more 
surprised by the pleasures of their house and  the new social  life. 
Among the  Philadelphians,  there was  less  sexual difference, men 
reporting as  much change as women, indicating the impact of the 
move from city to suburb. 

A  second  way  of estimating the  overall  impact of  the commu-
nity  is  through  a  summary  of  changes  reported  for  individual 
types  of  behavior.  As  Table  7  indicates,  the  move  typically  re-
sulted in change for  only about half the respondents.  Since none 
experienced a  consistent  pattern of change across  all  types  of be-
havior,  however, people could not be divided simply into chang-
ers and nonchangers. 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  255  • 

SPECIFIC BEllA VIOR CHANGES 

Levittown's  impact  and  the  reasons  for  its  impact  are  best  de-
scribed through specific behavior changes and their sources. Some 
of  the data  reported  in  previous chapters  (on  individual  adapta-
tion,  family  life,  and  visiting)  are  reanalyzed  briefly  to  identify 
the sources  which  produced the changes already reported.  (All  of 
the data, old and new, are brought together in Table 7-) 

Individual Adaptation 

The  sources  of  change  in  morale,  boredom,  loneliness,  and 
worries  are  often  similar,  and  can  be  traced  to  the  house,  home 
ownership,  social  life  (these being the  major  sources of improve-
ment),  social  isolation, and  separation from  relatives. The major 
non-Levitto}Vn  sources  (aside  from  those  causing chronic  depres-
sion  and  loneliness)  are  probably age  and  the  husband's absence 
from  the  home.  Higher morale can  be traced  to the  house, since 
apartment  dwellers  experienced  the  greatest  increase,  although 
among former urbanites the role  of  the  yard in  decreasing adult 
supervision of children was  also mentioned.~ Estimating roughly, 
about  half  the  reduction  in  boredom  could  be  traced  to  work 
around the house and yard, a quarter to social and organizational 
activities, and the rest to a combination of the two. 

Since  the  Philadelphia  sample-particularly  the  women-
showed less  improvement and more deterioration  for all  types  of 
adaptation,  it  would  seem  not  only  that  the  move  from  city  to 
suburb resulted in undesirable emotional effects but also that the 
move  causes  change  in  individual  adaptation.  A  more  detailed 
analysis  indicates  otfis:rwise,  however.  For  one  thing,  half  the 
Philadelphians were  bored  before coming to  Levittown,  suggest-
ing that city life can  bring on ennui  too.  (The source was lack of 
compatible  neighbors,  particularly  among  apartment  dwellers.) 
Since the same people reported higher morale, less  boredom, and 
less  loneliness  in  Levittown,  the  move  and  the  population  mix 
that created  Levittown's social  life  had a  positive  impact.  Never-
theless,  both  the  lower  morale  and  the  greater  boredom  experi-
enced  by  some  Philadelphians  stem  from  community-related 
sources in Levittown:  physical and social  isolation and separation 
from  relatives.  Former  Philadelphians  were  stuck  in  the  house 
without  the  access  to  downtown  stores  that  had  previously 

TABLE  7 
CHANGES OF BEHAVIOR AND ATTITUDES IN LEVITTOWN • 

ITEM: Change after moving to Levittown. 

Disposition • 
Health • 
Boredom 
Boredom: those bored in previous residence 

only 

Boredom: since first six months in Levittown 
Loneliness 
Loneliness:  those lonely in previous resi-

Loneliness: since first six months in Levit-

dence only 

town 

Problems: uew ones in Levittown •• 
Problems: fate of old ones in Levittown •  b 
Worries: new ones in Levittown • • 
Worries:  fate  of old ones  in Levittown •  • 
Children's school performance • 
Parents:  time spent with children 
Wives:  husbands' time spent with children 
Husbands:  time spent with wives 
Wives: time spent with husbands 

PER CENT REPORTING 

Random Sample 

rst Interview 
Less 

Same 

More 

2nd lnien,iew 
Less 

Same 

1Hore 

Philadelphia. 
Sample 
Less 

Same 

More 

46 

4 

38 
52 
43 
37 

5 
N.A. 
N.A. 

38 
N.A. 
N.A. 

N.A. 

N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 

3 
11 
6 
13 

49 

ss 

59 
37 
51 
so 

I 

23 

I 

0 

58 
64 
33 

20 
38 
35 

7 

0 

55 

36 
18 
16 

10 

5 
30 

7 
81 

39 

24 

6 
18 
51 

70 
57 
35 

70 

93 
19 
7 
N.A. 
N.A. 

21 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 

4.7 
74 
51 

28 
15 
35 

0 

0 

22 

9 
27 

20 
8 

43 

0 
71 
!14 
63 
37 
27 

31 
17 
22 

52 
77 
22 

100 

100 
29 
17 
37 

17 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 

N.A. 

N.A. 

N.A.  N.A. 
56 

Joint family  activity:  parents and children 
Joint family  activity:  since first  six months 

in Levittown 

Joint couple activity 
Quality of marital relationship • 
V!siting family in Philadelphia 
Visiting with neighbors 
Visiting with neighbors: since first six months 

. 

in Levittown 
Visiting with couples 

Visiting with couples: since first six months in 

Levittown 

Visiting with those of similar ethnic-religious 

29 

5:! 

59 

I 
I 

background 
Organizational activity 
Church attendance 

Political party preference • • • 
Spare time 

Spare time activities ••• 
Furniture style preference ••• 
Length of journey to work # 

• Read:  better-worse-same 
• •• Read:  change-no  change 
N.A.:  not  asked 

I 

45 

2 

55 

I  45 

10 

I 

N.A. 
N.A. 

5 
N.A. 
24 

N.A. 
19 

·N.A. 

N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
45 

68 

24 

44 

44 

I  so 
I 

45 

40 

25 

54 

5!1 
!I !I 

!15 
71 

30 

5 
N.A. 
5 
N.A. 
16 

25 

21 

25 

N.A. 

7 
9 
N.A. 
56 

N.A. 

45 

57 

74 

!JO 

47 
55 

54 

40 
58 

9 
29 
70 

N.A. 

N.A. 
20 

11 

68 

19 

N.A. 
22 

N.A. 

30 

11 

15 

N.A. 
N.A. 

30 

40 
69 
17 

55 

59 

51 

45 
56 
81 

75 
45 

I 

I 

40 
20 

15 
48 

59 

19 

44 
29 
19 

25 
25 

42 

1!1 

• • Read:  yes--no 
#  Read:  longer-shorter--same 

• The  number  of  persons  responding  for  the  random  sample  is  usually  44,  for  the  Philadelphia  one,  55·  In  the  former,  N  for 

women  only  was  26;  in  the  latter,  37· 

b  These data are only for  improvement or deterioration;  lack  of  change was not studied. 
'  These data are  only for improvement. 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

assuaged  boredom.  Among  them,  those  who  found  friends  and 
organizations  suffered  less,  but  socially  isolated  working  class 
people suffered  more.  Depression,  boredom,  and  loneliness  were 
most  serious among people who  had formerly  been  close  to  par-
ents and childhood friends,  however,  so  that it was  not the move 
from  city to suburb, but from a  particular kind of city life-that 
of  the  working class  or ethnic "urban village"-which  produced 
deleterious  effects.  Only  28  per  cent  of  the  overall  increase  in 
boredom could be attributed to Levittown, suggesting that much 
boredom was prior or chronic. 

The  sources  of  impact  can  also  be  seen  through  long-run 
change.  Levittown's  social  life  reduced  boredom  for  the  previ-
ously  isolated,  but  its  newness  provided  only  temporary  respite 
for  many  Philadelphians,  their  boredom  returning  as  physical 
and social  isolation and familial  loneliness beset them. Yet  Levit-
town's permanent role was minor;  two thirds of these women had 
been bored  in  Philadelphia  too.  For about a  quarter of the total 
sample of city women, and about  10 per cent of men,  Levittown 
meant  new  boredom,  however,  social  isolation  being  the  major 
source and the role change from  worker to mother the second. 

Loneliness  existed  among  48  per  cent  of  the  random  sample 
women  and  22  per  cent  of  the  Philadelphians  before  they  ever 
came to Levittown;  even then it was  due to  the same factors  that 
caused it in Levittown-the husband's traveling, separation from 
relatives,  and social  isolation.  The random sample  proportion  is 
high because of Transients who are far  away from  their parents; 
the  Philadelphia  one  is  low  because  they  were  still  close.  The 
new opportunities for visiting ended social loneliness for all those 
previously  isolated,  and  even  reduced  it  for  Transients  missing 
their parents. But 43  per cent of the Philadelphians found  them-
selves  newly  lonely,  because of  the  absence  of  husband,  of  rela-
tives,  and  because  of  social  isolation-in  that  order.  Loneliness 
also  increased  over  time, familial  as  well as  social  loneliness hav-
ing been held back at first  by the newness of the community. 

Levittown's quantitative  impact  on  loneliness  was  as  follows: 
12  per cent  of  the random  sample  (and  8  per cent of  the  Phila-
delphia one)  found  that loneliness  had disappeared or decreased 
after  the  move;  4  per cent  (and  11  per cent),  that  it rose  during 
the  early  months  in  Levittown  but  then  disappeared;  another 4 
per  cent  (and  5  per  cent),  that  it  disappeared  at  first  and  then 
returned;  and  19  per cent  (and  43  per cent),  that it was  created 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  259  • 

by  the move.  A  significant  proportion was  not affected  by Levit-
town  at all,  however;  35  per cent  of  the  random  sample  (and  8 
per cent of the Philadelphia one)  had been lonely at least once a 
month  before  and  remained  so  in  Levittown,  and  26  per  cent 
(and  25  per cent)  said  they  had  never  been and  were  not lonely 
now. 

Problems and worries, which also contributed to lower morale, 
could  be  traced  to  Levittown  in  about  two  thirds  of  the  cases. 
These  resulted  principally  from  financial  problems  due  to  the 
higher cost of living,  the sources being both home ownership and 
such  community-related  features  as  greater  cat  expenses  and 
taxes.  Sixty-three  per  cent  of  the  Philadelphians  reported  new 
worries after coming  to  Levittown.  Of all  their worries,  about a 
third were old ones,  55  per cent were  new and  related  to  Levit-
town,  and  15  per  cent  were  new  but  unrelated.  Once  more, 
financial  worries were uppermost among new ones,  but a quarter 
stemmed  from  the  impact  of  heterogeneity  on  children's  be-
havior  at  home  and  at  school.  Conversely,  over  a  third  of  both 
samples  found  problems  and  worries  reduced  or  disappearing, 
the space  provided by  the  house  giving people more privacy  and 
making  family  life  less  discordant,  and  the  lack  of  traffic  in  the 
streets eliminating fear for the children's safety. 

Family  Life 

Levittown's impact on family life represented the achievement 
of an  intended change  for  most  people,  the new  house playing a 
major role.  Family members who wanted more time together had 
it,  partly  because  commuting  did  not  increase,  but  mainly  be-
cause they wanted it.  More time was diverted to the family  by in-
creased opportunity to do things together, at first  in fixing up the 
house  and  yard. 6  The  role  of  the house  is  demonstrated  further 
by  the  sharp  increase  in  joint  family  activity  among  former 
apartment  dwellers,  whether  they  came  from  cities  or  suburbs. 
Part of the impact of the house was the result of novelty, for after 
two years  people cited  patio and  community recreational  oppor-
tunities  as  more  important  than  the  house.  These  interests  may 
also  wear  off  over  time,  although  40  per cent of  the  respondents 
reported  more  joint activity at  the  time  of  the  second  interview 
than at the first,  and only 3 per cent reported less.  For former city 
dwellers,  the  long-term  impact  of  house and community  is  even 
greater,  for  62  per cent found  more joint family  activity  than  at 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

arrival,  as  compared  to only 30  per cent of former suburbanites. 
A  second  source  of  family  cohesion,  perhaps  most  important  in 
the  long run,  was  the  age  of children,  which  was  extraneous  to 
Levittown, and suggests  that suburbia  per se  plays  only a  minor 
role in familial change. 

The  sources  of  increased  cohesion  among  spouses  are  also 
house and community, but after two years the former has not yet 
lost its novelty value for former city dwellers,  suggesting that the 
move to a  house is  more  important than  that to  the suburb. The 
Philadelphians also reported some  decrease, largely as  a result of 
babies'  taking  time  away  from  the  parents,  older children  sepa· 
rating them when  they  leave  the  family  to  be with other young-
sters, and men's longer work  hours. 

Three  quarters  of  the  random  sample  attributed  what  little 
change  took  place  in  the quality of married Hfe  to  joint activity 
around the house, greater privacy gained by additional space, and 
"maturity"  associated  with  home  ownership.1  Two  years  later, 
the  impact  of  the  house  had  begun  to  wear  off,  but  again,  not 
among  the  Philadelphians,  who  still  give  it as  the prime reason 
for  getting  along better  with  their spouses. 8  Even  so,  the group 
reporting  better marital  relations  most  often are  men who  have 
moved  away  from  parents and  in-laws,  50  per cent  saying  their 
marriages had improved. Only 14  per cent of the women felt this 
way, but neither they nor the men reported poorer marriages as a 
result of leaving parents. The suburban separation from relatives 
thus has some family benefits to counteract the emotional costs  to 
the  individual.  But  suburbia  had  marital  costs  too;  almost  all 
Philadelphians who reported a  poorer marriage blamed financial 
problems contracted in Levittown. 

Although English new-town studies have reported that nuclear 
family  cohesion  increases  after  separation  from  the  extended 
family  in  the  city,  this  was  not  the  case  among  Levittowners.11 
People  having  close  relatives  in  Philadelphia,  those  who  missed 
them,  and  even  those  who  had  lived  with  them  before  all  re-
ported doing  fewer  things  with  their spouse  in  Levittown  than 
people  without  relatives  in  the  city.  Marital  life,  however,  im-
proved among couples who did not miss close relatives.10 

Because  arrival  in  Levittown  was  followed  by a  rash  of preg-
nancies  (and  much  joking  about  it as  well),  people  were asked 
whether "living here  had anything to do with your wanting an-

•  261  • 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 
other  child."  The  jokes  had  children  being  conceived  because 
entertainment facilities were scarce,  and later,  because pregnancy 
was  fashionable-the  "suburbia  as  rabbit  hutch"  myth.  Forty· 
three  per  cent  of  the  random  sample  and  62  per  cent  of  the 
Philadelphia sample had  children  after moving,  but  71  per cent 
of the fonner and 53  per cent of the latter said they had intended 
to enlarge their families.  None of the remainder ascribed the new 
babies  to  Levittown;  11  they  explained  that  they  either  did  not 
practice  birth  control  or  that  the  children  were  "accidental." 12 
Perhaps  the latter came as  an  unintended result--or expectation 
--of  greater  contentment  in  Levittown,  for  one  woman  said 
blithely, "It just happened when we were moving." 

Neighbor and Couple  Visiting 

The sizeable increases in visiting were largely  intended, 40 per 
cent  of  the  random  sample  saying  they  came  to  Levittown  with 
the idea of doing more visiting of both kinds.  Levittown enabled 
them to achieve  their wish,  for  the greatest increase was  reported 
by  those  intending it. 13  Yet  there  were also  unintended changes, 
mostly  in the direction of more visiting. 14  The sources of change 
are  the  newness  of  the community and  the  population  mix;  the 
friendliness of the people and the availability of compatible ones 
even  persuading  some  to  do  more  visiting  than  they  had  in-
tended.  Decreases,  largely  unintended,  were  explained  by  the 
lack of compatible people. 16 

If suburbia  had  a  significant  impact  on  social  life,  one  would 
expect former city dwellers to report a greater increase in visiting 
than  former suburbanites, and  this occurred  in neighboring,  but 
not  in  couple  visiting.  However,  even  the  increase  in  neighbor-
ing  is  more  a  result  of  the  move  from  apartment  to  house  than 
from  city to  suburb,  and from  transitional  areas,  urban. and sub-
urban,  where  compatible  neighbors  were  scarcer. 16  Compatibil-
ity  in  Levittown  is  more  influential  than  the  move,  for  not  all 
fanner city residents reported the same changes.  Moreover, being 
integrated into the community played a  major role.  In both sam-
ples,  organizationaily  active  people  and  Jews,  who  were  so  weii 
organized  as  an  ethnic  group,  reported  the  greatest  increases  in 
couple  visiting,  whereas  partners  in  mixed  marriages  reported 
significant  decreases.  The  lesser  increase  in  couple  visiting  as 
compared to neighboring among  Philadelphians is  e)'plained  by 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

their continued association with old friends  in the city, although 
those  lacking  compatible  people  in  Levittown  preferred  old 
friends more than the rest. 17 

Changes  over  time  again  identify  the  primary  sources  of 
change.  If the  initial  increase  in  visiting  had  been  due  to  the 
community's  newness,  decreases  should  have  taken  place  after 
two  years,  but 30  per cent of  the random sample reported  more 
neighboring  then  than  after  six  months  (when  most  said  they 
had  settled  down),  43  per  cent  reported  more  couple  visiting, 
and only 23  per cent reported decreases for both types of visiting. 
The changes go  hand in hand;  those who visited neighbors more 
also  visited couples  more,  and  vice  versa.  In some  instances,  the 
reduction was  due  to  the  fading of novelty and  the departure of 
favorite  neighbors,  but  the  greatest  reductions  between  inter-
views,  in both kinds of visiting,  took place among low-status peo-
ple and  mixed-marriage  partners;  the  greatest  increases,  among 
people of middle  status and  organization  members.  Compatibil-
ity or lack of it is still the significant source of change. 

Compatibility  and  the  population  mix  which  creates  it  are 
usually  found  in  the  suburbs,  but are  not  uniquely  suburban; 
they occur  in all  new settlements,  even  in  the city,  because  they 
bring together  homogeneous  young  people. 18  Consequently,  the 
increase  in social  life cannot be ascribed as  much  to suburbia as 
to  newness  and  to  the  desire  for  sociability  among  residents.111 
Nevertheless,  neither friendliness  nor  the  population  mix are a 
result of newness per se, for as  long as  people remain compatible, 
and  compatible  people  remain  in  the  community,  visiting  will 
not be reduced by the mere aging of the community, but only by 
the development of population turnover-and incompatibility-
over time.20 

Organizational Participation 

I  turn  now  to  behavior changes not discussed  previously,  and 
will  describe  both  the  changes  and  their  sources.  One  of  the 
most  frequently  reported  changes  was  an  increase  in  organiza-
tional activity:  53  per cent of the random sample and 44 per cent 
of the Philadelphia sample considered themselves more active  in 
secular and church-related organizations (not including churches) 
than  in  the  former  residence.  Altogether,  73  per  cent  in 
both  samples  belonged  to  local  groups.  though  almost  three 
fifths  of  all  memberships  were  in  churches  and  church-related 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

ones only,  and just  30  per cent  (in  both  samples)  belonged  to a 
secular organization. The rise in activity was as  high  among peo-
ple  who  described  themselves  as  particularly  active  in  their 
former residence as  among the rest.21  True to expectations,  high-
status people  reported  increased  activity  most  often,  but  half  of 
the  low-status  respondents  were  more  active  than  before,  par-
ticularly in religious groups. The desire to meet people, the avaii-
ability  of  more  spare  time,  and  the  need  to  join  PTA  or  the 
church because children were old enough to be in school  or Sun-
day  school  were  the  prime  reasons  for  stepped-up  membership, 
although a  fifth  of the more active also said  they wanted "to be  a 
part of the community" or were persuaded by friends and neigh-
bors to help out by joining. 

A  slight  majority  of  the  random  sample,  58  per cent,  was  in· 
tended  joiners,  but  the  proportions  varied  by  type  of  organiza-
tion.22  Intended memberships reflected personal  or family  needs, 
leading people  into church,  PTA,  or Scout  groups;  unintended 
ones  implied  a  greater  involvement  in  community  affairs.  Sev-
enty  per  cent  of  memberships  in  churches  or  church-related 
groups were  intended,  but only 22  per cent of those  in civic  and 
service  clubs,  and  none  in  social,  political,  and cultural  groups. 
Indeed,  unintended activity was  usually stimulated from outside 
the  home,  58  per  cent  of  the  respondents  indicating  they  had 
been asked  to join by a  neighbor or a  canvasser,  and  14  per cent, 
because  they had seen  the group's announcement  in  the  paper.23 
Unintended  members  had  also  been  less  active  in  their  former 
communities. 

The high  proportion  of  intended  joining suggests  that  Levit· 
town's  impact  on  organizational  activity  was  hardly  universal. 24 
The intended  joiners were  most  interested  in  meeting new  peo-
ple or providing for their children, neither of which factors could 
be considered specific  to  Levittown,  but the  unintended  joiners 
came also  because  they were asked,  responding  to  the communi-
ty's newness,  to the need of organizations to enroll  members, and 
to  people's  desire  to  belong  to  the  community  in  some  way.  If 
suburbia per se  encouraged organizational activity,  however,  one 
would have expected former city residents to be more active  than 
former suburbanites (which  was not the case)  and also  that  there 
would  be  an  increase  in  activity  over  time.  The latter did  take 
place,  because of the scarcity of groups at the  time of the first  in-
terview;  even so,  30 per cent who had been  members at the time 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

of  that  interview  had  dropped  out  by  the  second  interview. 25  A 
quarter  of  the  dropouts  could  not  get  along  with  their  fellow 
members;  the  rest  left because  family  obligations  of one kind  or 
another were more important to  them. 

Religious Attendance 

Although  suburbia  has allegedly  brought about a  religious re-
vival,  only a  third of the  Levittowners reported increased church 
or synagogue attendance  after the move, and close  to  6o  per cent 
said  no  change  had  taken  place. 26  If suburbia  were  responsible 
for  the  rise,  former  city  dwellers  should  have  reported  more  at-
tendance,  but  as  Table  7  indicates,  increased  attendance  was 
about the same for  both samples,  and the Philadelphians actually 
experienced  a  greater  decrease  in  attendance  than  the  random 
sample.  Although  this could  mean  that  the move  to  the suburbs 
discourages  religiosity,  it  is  actually  a  result  of relaxed  parental 
ties,  for  Philadelphians who had lived with parents or in-laws re-
port considerably  more  decrease  than  others.27 

If suburbia were the source of change, it should have been uni-
form  for  all  religions,  but  in  both  samples,  Jews  increased  their 
attendance  most  often  and  Catholics  the  least.  In  the  random 
sample,  14  per cent of the Catholics and all of the Jews now wor-
shipped  more  often,  and  none  of  them  worshipped  less  often. 
Twenty-nine  per  cent  of  the  Protestants  also  worshipped  more 
often, but  17  per cent, less  often.28  Catholic stability is explained 
by  the  compulsory  nature  of  attendance,  but  among  other  reli-
gious groups,  changes  reflect  the  impact of  the community-par-
ticularly  the  intensity  of  church  organization.  Jews  responded 
less  to  religion  than  to  the  ethnic  subcommunity,  and  Jewish 
women,  who  were  more  active  in  it,  reported  a  higher  increase 
in attendance than men. 29  On the other hand, Catholic men were 
more active than women  in  their church, and  their  Mass  attend-
ance  rose  more  than  their  wives'.  The  previously  noted  mar-
ginality  of  mixed-marriage  partners  manifests  itself  again;  they 
reported  the smallest increase and  the largest decrease  in  church 
attendance. 30 

The role  of  the  community comes  through  clearly  in  the  rea-
sons Jews and Protestants give for increasing worship. Among the 
former,  the search for friends,  the need to  have  the children edu-
cated in Jewish ways, and the adult desire to be part of the Jewish 
subcommunity  were  mentioned  in  equal  numbers.  As  one  re-

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

spondent summarized  it,  "To be honest,  it's  partly social.  There 
is  a  moral  responsibility to make a  good synagogue and to  have a 
Sunday school  for  the children, but it's also  for affairs and activi-
ties."  "Belonging"  was  most  important  to  former  city  dwellers, 
and  in  the  words  of  one,  "In  New  York,  [religious  observance] 
was  only for  the very old and the very religious.  Here you  get an 
identity  and  you  flock  to  your  own  kind."  While  most  Jews 
would  eventually  have  joined a  synagogue  to  educate  their chil-
dren,  living  among  non-Jews  hurried  the  process  and  produced 
an  unintended effect of the move  to  Levittown.  That  the search 
is  for ethnic cohesion rather than religiosity is  brought out by the 
fact  that  none  of  the  Jews  with  Christian  spouses  reported  in-
creased  synagogue  attendance. 

Protestants  stressed  even  more  that  "it's  for  the  children's 
sake," and "to be a  part of the community." They do not see  the 
community  as  a  group  of  fellow  religionists,  however,  but  as  a 
place  in  which  to  settle  down.  One  pointed  out,  "We are  active 
in  the  community,  so  we  should  be  active  in  church  too."  A 
former  tenant  explained  his  failure  to  go  to  church  before  he 
moved  to  Levittown  by  saying,  "Apartment  living  is  not  con-
ducive  to  churchgoing;  you  are  withdrawn  into  yourself,  you 
don't  do  as  many  things."  In  fact,  former  apartment-dwelling 
Protestants  in  both  samples  increased  their  church  attendance 
more  than  row  house  or  single-family  home  occupants,  and 
former  city  dwellers  more  than  suburbanites.31  Among  Phila-
delphia Protestants, but no others,  higher church attendance was 
also  associated  with  increased  visiting,  suggesting that the church 
helped  integrate them  into social  life--or vice versa. 32  Purely so-
cial  motives  for  church  attendance  were  rare,  however,  only  20 
per cent of Protestant friendships  being made in church, as  com-
pared  to  42  per  cent  among  Jews. 88  My  hunch  is  that  Protes-
tants  who  felt  themselves  part of  the  community  were  more  ac-
tive  religiously and socially,  whereas  those left out of it were  less 
active. 

For  these  Protestants and almost all  Jews,  the  suburban  move 
brought  about  greater  religious  participation,  but  it  had  differ-
ent meanings and sources for each.  Both attended partly for  their 
children's  sake  and  for  social  reasons,  but  the  Protestants  were 
impelled  principally  by  home  ownership,  the  Jews  by  ethnic 
needs  heightened  by  the  population  mix.  In  neither  case  was 
there any evidence of a  religious revival, however.  Nor do people 

•  266  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

attend  more  often  for  social  than  for  theological  reasons  since 
they  moved  to  the  suburbs,  although  I  doubt  that  they  were  as 
theologically  inclined  in  the  city  and  in  the  fabled  past  as  is 
sometimes claimed. 

Political Party  Shifts 

Suburbs  are  often  reputed  to  turn  Democrats  into  Republi-
cans,  but  in  Levittown,  only  about  a  fifth  of  the  voters  have 
changed  parties,  many  of  them  Democrats  who  became  inde-
pendents, "voting for  the man, not the party." Among the Phila-
delphians,  21  per  cent  of  former  Democrats,  1 o  per  cent  of 
former  Republicans,  and  22  per cent of former  independents re-
ported  changing  their  party  preference  after  moving  to  Levit· 
town. 34  The changers  were  more often  high-status  people  (none 
of  the  low-status  respondents  gave  up  their  prior  party  alle-
giance) and of all religions;  however,  Irish Catholics-in political 
transition all  over the country--changed  parties twice as  often  as 
all  other  ethnic  groups.  Four  of  the  six  previous  Democrats 
became  independents  and  two  became  Republicans;  two  pre-
vious  independents  and  a  Republican  were  now  voting  Demo-
cratic.  The  numbers  are  minuscule,  but  they  do  not  indicate  a 
shift  to  Republicanism. 35  Indeed,  they  suggest  that  class,  not 
party,  is  the crucial  factor.  Three middle class  Irish  residents  in-
dicated  that they were no longer voting for  the Democratic party 
but for  the man, whereas a working class  Protestant, traditionally 
Republican,  chose  the  Democrats  in  Levittown  because  she  felt 
closer  to  them.  Insofar  as  the  move  itself  was  an  expression  of 
aspirations  for  social  mobility,  the  change  in  voting  is  a  by-
product  rather  than  an  effect  of  the  move,  the  equivalent of an 
intended rather than an unintended change. If Levittown had an 
impact,  it  was  to  provide  people  from  Philadelphia  (then  virtu-
ally  a  one-party  city)  with  more  choice  among  parties  and  the 
opportunity,  as  independents,  to  free  themselves  of  party  al-
legiance.  Only time will  tell,  however, whether this is  an effect of 
suburbia,  or  only  of  the  newness  of  the  community,  that  is,  an 
expression  of  the desire  to  postpone a  choice  until  party  images 
have stabilized. 

Despite  their new  status  as  tax-paying home  owners  and  tht>ir 
better  opportunity  to  get  to  know  the  candidates,  the  Philadel-
phians  did  not  vote  in  larger  numbers  after  moving  to  Levit-
town.  Indeed,  only  2  per  cent  reported  not  voting  in  Philadel-

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

phia elections, and 5  per cent in  Levittown.  The two  Levittown 
elections  about  which  respondents  were  reporting  both  drew  a 
turnout of go  per cent of registered voters,  but in later elections, 
the  percentages dropped to 71,  63,  and  77  respectively.  It seems 
doubtful, then,  that  the move  to  the  suburbs increased voter  in-
terest, and a  telephone survey I  conducted the day after the  1960 
election  indicated  that many  had  already forgotten  the name  of 
their  candidate-even  though  (or,  perhaps,  because)  it  was 
Smith. Individual Levittowners did, however, develop an interest 
in  politics for  the first  time  in Levittown, and  became active  be-
cause  the smallness of the community put them in direct contact 
with politicians." 

Spare-Time,  Leisure,  and  Consumption  Styles 

Although  the  critics  argue  that suburban living deprives peo-
ple of spare time, and 56 per cent of the random sample of Levit-
towners agreed,  35  per cent found  they had more time now;  only 
9 per cent indicated that no change had taken  place (less than for 
any  other  item  in the  interview  schedule).  Women  had  slightly 
less  time  now  than  men,  childless  couples  reported  no  change, 
and  those  with  one  or  two  children  also  had  less.  Fully  83  per 
cent of families with four or more children reported an  increase, 
however,  so  that  becoming  a  parent and  the  children's  ages  are 
probably  more  important  determinants  of  spare-time  change 
than any other factor. 87  Indeed,  the women  give  this as  the  prin-
cipal  reason.  Those  with  children  of  school  age  now  had  more 
time;  those  whose  babies  had  reached  the  "active"  stage,  less. 
Most  who  had  previously  been  tenants  also  reported  less  spare 
time,  but  there was  no difference  between  urban  and  suburban 
residents,  indicating  that  home  ownership,  not  the  community, 
creates the impact. The new house was also  the second  major rea-
son given for change;  some women found  it easier to take care of, 
but  an  equal  number  said  it  took  more  time.  The  journey  to 
work did  not cut  into men's  sp~re time,  but among the  women, 
the  longer  the  husband's  trip,  the more  who  reported  decreased 
spare time. The men said  that job 1:hange was  more significant;  a 
new job might take longer or shorter hours. 

Change in the kinds of leisure activit;es  pursued is  reported al-
most as  often as  time change (by 71  per cent of the  respondents). 
Forty-two  per  cent  of  the  women  indulge  in  more  social  and 
game activities,  mostly card playing,  2 1  per cent mention a  shift 

•  268  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

to  work around the  house and yard,  and  16  per cent to organiza-
tional  participation.  Among the men,  70  per cent have  taken  up 
house and yard work. All other changes are numerically insignifi-
cant.  As  might  be  expected,  83  per  cent  of  people  with  more 
spare  time mention activity changes,  but so  did  68  per cent with 
less  time,  demonstrating that activity change has  little to do with 
available  time.  Some  women  organized  their  housework  more 
efficiently  now,  partly  because  social  opportunities  and  higher 
morale encouraged them  to  alter  the daily  routine  to leave  time 
for  other  activities.  For most  people,  however,  new  pursuits  are 
either  required  or  facilitated  by  the  move,  and  their  effect  on 
spare  time  is  a  matter  of  personal  definilion,  those  disliking  the 
new activity finding that it cuts into their spare time. 

Care of the yard is  obligatory, and the work must be done dur-
ing  spare  time.  Whether  gardening  deprives  people  of  leisure 
hours  depends  on  how  they  feel  about  it.  One  man  said  sadly, 
"The  house  takes  priority  over  fishing,  boating,  and  hunting; 
I've  sold  my  boat,"  but another said,  "It's all  lawn  now.  I  don't 
do  as  much  reading;  I  have  no  time.  It doesn't  bother  me;  my 
mind  is  more  occupied  here,  I  have  more  ambition  and  I  am 
more active around  the  house."  For the  large majority,  however, 
gardening  takes  away  spare  time,  for  77  per  cent  of  those  who 
identify house and yard work as  the principal activity change also 
say  they have less spare time.  Other activity changes, for example, 
more  visiting,  do  not cut  into  it. 88  For  example,  40  per cent of 
the  residents--men  (who  do  most  of  the  yard  work)  as  often  as 
women-found time  to  add  new magazines  to  their reading fare 
the first  year.  New magazines are  taken  most  often  by  those  who 
do  less  visiting,  although  not  by  those  who  are  more  bored  in 
Levittown  than  they  were  before,  but  then  they  are  usually 
poorly  educated  people  who  do  not  read  much.  Moreover,  low-
status respondents  report  both  the  least  activity  change  and also 
the  greatest  loss  in  spare  time,  indicating  that  the  yard  may  be 
more of a chore for them than for anyone else. 

The move from  city to suburb has had considerable impact on 
leisure  time and activity,  for  93  per cent of former city residents 
report  changes  in  both.39  Although  former  apartment  dwellers 
and  tenants  indicate  more change  than  former  homeowners,  the 
move  from  city  to  suburb  is  the  crucial  one,  for  regardless  of 
house  type,  previous  urbanites  report  change  more  often  than 
suburbanites,  at least  in  activities. 40  (If gardening were  the  only 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

innovation,  the  change  in  house  type  would  have  been  a  more 
significant  source,  but  former  city  dwellers  also  experienced  in-
creased  social  life  and  organizational  activity,  which  are  related 
to  the change  in settlement  type.)  In  any case,  their leisure  pur-
suits  have  been  transformed  by the move,  although  some change 
may disappear  as  the novelty of house and community wears  off. 
Since working in the yard and making new friends were included 
among aspirations before the move,  the new activities were an in-
tended change for many. 

If the  suburban  critics are  right,  increased  spare  time and  ac-
tivity change should lead to more boredom, and bored Levittown-
ers  should  have  tried  activity  change  to  cut  down  ennui  more 
than others.  None of these predictions came to pass,  however,  for 
the  proportion  bored  at  least  once  a  month  is  the  same  among 
people with  more and with  less  spare  time  (20  per cent),  and no 
Levittowner with added  spare  time  is  more  bored  than  before.41 
Likewise,  boredom  is  not  associated  with  activity cJ:tange;  three 
fourths  of the  bored  have  taken  on  new  leisure  pursuits,  but so 
have  two  thirds of those  who are not bored.  Neither leisure-time 
change  nor activity change seems  to  have  any effect on  boredom. 
Changes  in  leisure  styles  seemed  minimal,  for  as  I  noted 
earlier, the Levittowners were not given  to partying, and judging 
from  my  own  visiting,  the  higher  alcohol  consumption  and  the 
accompanying shift from  beer to cocktails attributed to suburbia 
did not take place.42  Sunday afternoon trips  to parks and beaches 
became rarer, for  the greenery in the backyard and  the neighbor-
hood  pools  provided  satisfactory  substitutes  within  easy  access 
and  some  people  took  to  inspecting other  new  housing develop-
ments  in  the  area.  Except  among  the  children,  going  to  the 
movies  became  an  unusual  occurrence,  even  though  Levittown 
eventually  had  two  movie  theaters,  for  television  offered  a  more 
easily  accessible  and  cheaper  substitute.  Going  out  for  dinner, 
particularly  on  weekend  nights,  may  have  increased  somewhat. 
Sometimes dining out was with other couples;  more often it was a 
family affair to give the children a  treat and relieve the housewife 
of  the  cooking  chore.  Like  other  suburbanites,  however,  Levit-
towners  soon  built  backyard  patios,  and  took  to  having outdoor 
barbecues,  quite  regularly  for  the  family  and  occasionally  for 
friends. 

Thirty per cent of the  random  sample  and  25  per cent of  the 
city  sample  also  responded  positively  to  a  question,  asked  of 

•  270  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

women,  whether "there had been any change  in  the style  of fur-
niture liked  best after moving to  Levittown."  Fifty-four per cent 
had  shifted  from  modern  to  traditional,  15  per cent  from  tradi-
tional  to  modern,  and  the  rest,  from  one  type  of  traditional  or 
modern  to  another.4 3  The  principal  impetus  was  the  pseudo-
Colonial  fa~ade of  the  Levitt  house,  and  70  per  cent  of  those 
changing  to  traditional  furniture  chose  "Early  American."  As 
one woman said, "If the house had been Oriental, we would have 
bought  bamboo."  Others  cited  personal  esthetic  preferences  or 
:he  greater  comfort  of  traditional  styles,  and  some  ascribed  the 
shift  to  increasing  maturity.  "Being  young,  we  liked  modern 
first,"  one explained. There was no relation between style change 
and  income,  class,  or  even  age.  Former  urbanites  shifted  more 
often,  but former renters, who would be most  likely  to buy new 
furniture while moving, changed more often than former owners 
only  in  the  random  sample  group.  The changers  seemed  to  be 
people dissatisfied with their life before Levittown, because those 
bored  in  the  previous  residence  and  those  wanting  to  make 
changes  in  their way  of living before arrival  were  more likely  to 
adopt  new  styles.  Being  bored  in  Levittown  did  not  correlate 
with change, however, and people with  improved morale chose a 
new  furniture  style  more  often  than  unhappy  ones.  Evidently, 
the  desire  for  change  preceded  Levittown,  although  the  actual 
change  took  place  afterwards,  the  stimulus  for  the  new  style 
preference often coming from  neighbors,  people liking the styles 
they saw when they went visiting. 44 

Without a  study of  the  distribution  of furniture  styles  in  the 
community it is  not possible to say  whether the changes were im-
pelled by Levitt's houses,  by the neighbors, or by personal prefer-
ence}~ Undoubtedly,  the Colonial  style of the  house made Early 
American furniture seem most relevant to those already consider-
ing  change,  but  then  Levitt  himself  had  adoptt:d  the  Colonial 
style  while  completing  Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  and  both  he 
and his customers were probably responding to a nationwide im-
pulse  that  h~d nothing  to  do  with  the  new  Levittown.  Since 
modern style is associated with youth and traditional is associated 
with  maturity and  residential  stability,  the  preference  for  Colo-
nial  design  may  well  be  a  function  of  the desire  to settle down, 
interpreted  as  a  return  to  traditional  values.  Why  some  other 
eighteenth  or  nineteenth  century  style  was  not  chosen  is  prob-
ably explained by  the high  status associated  with Colonial  archi-

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  271 

• 

tecture and furniture and with  its symbolism of rural  and small-
town America. These associations must not be exaggerated,  how-
ever,  for  the  majority  of  Levittowners  seemed  content  to  live 
with  the  furniture  style  they  had brought with  them  from  their 
previous residence. 

Attitudes Toward  Suburbs  and Cities 

Living in  Levittown altered people's attitudes toward both the 
community and  the  city.  The random  sample  was  asked  in  two 
interviews how they liked living in Levittown;  the majority liked 
it "very much"  both  times,  none disliked  it,  and  only a  handful 
were  ambivalent. 48  Even  so,  a  third  changed  their  opinions  be-
tween  interviews,  II  per cent being more pleased at the later in-
terview  than  before,  23  per  cent  less.  The  major  complaints, 
each  voiced  by a  quarter of  the  complainants,  were  rising  taxes, 
lack  of  public  transportation  within  Levittown  and  to  the  city, 
and  lot  size  or  lack  of  fences.  The  last-named  complaints  ex-
pressed  the  wish  of  some  to  be  separated  from  incompatible 
neighbors or desire for more acreage and the status that goes with 
it.47 

Attitude  changes  over  time  are  reflected  in  future  moving 
plans.  After  two  to  three  years  in  Levittown,  most  respond'e~ts 
still  want to stay and only a  fifth  have changed their minds-not--1 
all  of  them  to  leave.  In  the  random  sample  group,  about  three 
fourths  planned  to  stay  and  the  rest  to  leave;  a  total  of  I7  per 
cent had changed their original intent, 7 per cent to settle,  10 per 
cent  to  move.48  When  the  Philadelphians  first  came  to  Levit-
town,  half said  they  planned  to settle,  20  per cent  to  move,  and 
30  per  cent  were  undecided.49  Three  years  later,  63  per  cent 
planned  to settle,  33  per cent to move,  and 4  per cent were still 
undecided.~0  Most  of  the  initially  uncertain  now  want  to  leave, 
but of the rest, only 21  per cent had changed their minds,  14 per 
cent to move,  7 per cent to stay.  Older, lower-status  people were 
more  likely  to  settle,  younger,  ~igher-status ones  to  leave.  The 
latter want "a bigger and better house," or "a community that is 
not  a  development"-that  is,  a  more  settled  suburban  town  of 
higher income and status.  For most Mobiles,  living in Levittown 
has not altered aspirations for a  "better" suburb, but since  these 
existed before arrival, neither has it created them. 

Although no one planned  to return  to the city,  65  per cent of 
the women  in  the  Philadelphia sample and half the men  missed 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

it.  These  people  fall  into  three  types. 51  Well-educated,  city-bred 
women  (many  of  them  Jewish)  miss  its  downtown  cultmal  and 
shopping  facilities.  Low-status  couples 
(particularly  Italian 
women)  miss  people  in  the  old  neighborhood  and  downtown 
shops.  Men,  principally blue collar workers,  miss  trips  that com-
bined shopping and visiting. 52  Fifty-seven  per cent of the women 
and  25  per cent of the men, usually  the less  educated, missed  the 
old  neighborhood. 53  No  ethnic  or  religious  group  stood  out, 
however.  The  neighborhood  was  missed  for  its  people,  88  per 
cent  pointing  to  relatives,  neighbors,  and  friends  in  that  order; 
and 6  per cent,  for  the  neighborhood  church.  Thirteen per cent 
who came  to  Levittown  from  apartments missed  them  now,  and 
27  per  cent  missed  their  former  row  house.  None  of  the  men 
missed  the apartment, but women  recalled less  housework  there; 
a  thi~d of the men and  20 per cent of the women missed the row 
house, primarily because of lower heat bills.M 

None  of  the  Philadelphians  who  missed  the  city  wished  to 
move back,  but 59 per cent of the women in the sample said they 
would  like  to  live  in  the  city  "were  it  not for  the  children,"  al-
most  three  times  as  many  as  the  23  per cent  who  had  answered 
the  same  question  on  the  mail  questionnaire  before  coming  to 
Levittown.  (Among men,  the  proportion  increased only from  23 
per cent to  29.)  By and large,  the women who would now choose 
the city  if they  were childless  included, as  before,  the young,  the 
well-educated,  Jews,  and  Italians,  but  they  have  been  joined  by 
additional  well-educated  women,  high  school  dropouts,  partners 
in  mixed  marriages,  and  women  who  lived  with  parents  or  in-
laws  before  Levittown. 55  Some  were,  once  again,  the  socially 
isolated  and  extruded,  but  not  all,  for  there  was  no  association 
between boredom or loneliness in Levittown and wanting to live 
in the city. 56 

Of  course,  the  interview  question  about  a  return  to  the  city 
was  hypothetical,  and  answers  tapped  the shortcomings of  Levit-
town and an image of life without children rather than any great 
yearning  for  the  city.  As  a  result,  reasons  for  the  choice  corre-
spond  closely  to  answers  to  a  question  on  what  urban  facilities 
were wanted in Levittown-better transportation to the city, and 
more  stores,  entertainment,  and  cultural  facilities. 57  The  image 
of life  without children  came  through  in  choosing where  to live 
in  the city.  A  few  had dreams of urbane luxury, picking a  River-
side  Drive  apartment  in  New  York  City  or  a  town  house  in 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  273  • 

downtown San  Francisco;  others saw  the move as  an escape  from 
housework and a  chance  to have more free  time.  Accordingly,  55 
per cent of the respondents  opted  for  an  apartment,  14  per cent 
for a  town  house (all  of them women), and  the remaining 31  per 
cent  for  another  singJe.family  house.  But the  same  impulse  that 
brought  Philadelphians  out  to  the  suburbs  in  the  first  place  re-
asserted  itself  in  their  locating  of  these  hypothetical  residences; 
58  per cent  (63  per  cent  of  the  women)  wanted  to  live  in  the 
outer parts of the city and only 42  per cent chose downtown.  Per-
haps  the  typical  response  was  given  by  one  woman:  "a  luxury 
apartment, but not in center city."  The people who rejected  the 
city even without children  preferred the  lack of  congestion,  out-
door living,  fresh  air, and  the  peace and quiet of the suburbs. 

Even  the  teenagers,  whom  I  had  expected  to  be  urbanites,  do 
not want to live in  the city. They miss downtown movie theaters, 
but  previous  city  dwellers  among  them  are  only  slightly  more 
discontented  with  Levittown  than  the  rest. 58  The  adolescents' 
complaints  about  Levittown  (other  than  "nothing  to  do")  re-
sembled  those  of  the  critics  and  reflected  the  adult suburbanity 
they  hope  to achieve.  The few  teenagers  who commented on  the 
community  were  unhappy  about  the  look-alike  quality  of  the 
houses and the rule against ferrces.  Like their parents-but unlike 
the  critics-some  wanted  lower  densities  and  larger  lots;  one 
tenth-grade girl said,  "I would like to  have a  big yard when I  get 
married,  because I  don't wish  the  neighbors  to hear my husband 
and me fighting." 

To test  attitudes  about  the  house,  suburbia,  and  the city  fur-
ther,  the  random  sample  was  asked  to  choose  between  its  Levitt 
house  and a  hypothetical  ideal  row  house  resembling  the  Levitt 
house  in  a  Levittown-like  community:  if  the  community  were 
only fifteen  minutes from  the  husband's job;  if it were a  similar 
distance from downtown  Philadelphia;  and,  if it were  cheaper.~9 
Although many planners argue  that  the  row  house  is  the answer 
to urban sprawl, and some predict it must become the major sub-
urban  building  type during  the  next housing  boom, most  Levit-
towners  were  not  interested.  Altogether,  22  per  cent  chose  the 
row  house at least once,  but no one for.  the  house itself.  Nine per 
cent picked  it to reduce  the  man's  journey to work-all of them 
women;  7  per cent,  to  be  cleser  to  downtown  facilities,  and  14 
per  cent,  if  it  were  at  least  $woo-2ooo  cheaper. 60  But  most 
would not take  the house  at any  price.  "You'd  have  to give  it to 

•  274  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

me,"  said  one.  "I  figure  I'm  going  to  be ninety  when  I  pay  off 
this mortgage," said another,  "and I  might as  well  go first  class." 
Even  those  who  chose  the  row  house  said  they did  not  want  to 
live  in one, and their choices really reflected dissatisfactions with 
Levittown. 61  The  common  and  almost  universal  objection  was 
lack  of  privacy.  One  Le'<'ittowner  explained,  "In  a  row  house, 
you  hear everybody's  troubles.  You  are always  hearing the other 
person's  business  and  fighting  about  how  much  of  the  lawn  and 
driveway  is  yours.  You  spend  too  much  time  with  your  ear 
against  the  wall."  Freedom  from  the  supervision  and  judgment 
of  adjacent  neighbors  (and  from  the  temptation  to  judge  them) 
are  more  important  than  easier  access  to  job  or city.  Unless  fu· 
ture  row  houses  are designed  to  maximize  privacy,  and  can also 
overcome  their  present  low·status  image,  they  will  not  be  very 
popular with the next generation of home buyers. 62 

Levittown  has  undoubtedly  made  an  impact  on  people's  atti-
tudes, creating more favorable opinions toward the city than they 
held  before.  Even  so,  these  reflect  Levittown's drawbacks,  partic-
ularly  poor  transportation  to  the  city,  rather  than  an  endorse-
ment  of  city  living.  Most  Levittowners  would  probably  move 
into a  house  in  a  low-density,  suburban-like area  in  or  near  the 
center of  the city,  provided  it cost  no more  than  what  they now 
pay.  However, since  this is  out of the question, and the city does 
not lure them in the first  place, they would gladly settle for more 
urban  facilities  and conveniences  in suburbia.  It may  be prema-
ture to expect urban enthusiasm from a population just two years 
in  its  new  suburban  home,  but  judging  by  the  pleasure  which 
older Levittowners found  in their houses,  I  doubt whether many 
young couples  will  consider a  return  to  the city  once  their chil-
dren  have  grown  up,  particularly as  the  house  is  then  just paid 
for. 

DOES SUBURBIA CHANGE PEOPLE? 

The  welter  of  statistics  suggests  that  the  move  to  the  suburb 
and  to  a  new  community changes  some  people,  but  not  in  uni-
form  ways.  Church  attendance  may  go  up  but  it  may  also  go 
down, and often  it remains as  it was  before.  The most frequently 
reported changes are not caused by the suburbs,  but were reasons 
for  going there  in  the first  place.  A smaller proportion are,  how-
ever,  unintended results of the move-some good, some bad. 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  275  • 

Some  people  change more  beyond  the  city limits  than  others. 
Women,  particularly  former  urban  ones,  experience  the  most 
changes,  as  well  as  the  most  unintended  changes  and  the  most 
undesirable  ones.  So  do  people  of least and  most status and  edu-
cation, young  people entering a  new  familial  role,  and of course 
the socially isolated.  Urban  men,  former  tenants,  the people who 
share  the  dominant  culture  of  the  new  community,  and  more 
generally,  the  majority  of  all  who  reported  changes,  experience 
desired and desirable changes. 

Good or bad,  many changes  have nothing to do with  the move 
but are related  to  factors  of age,  sex,  class  and ethnic culture,  or 
occupation.  Others  are  produced  by  the  community's  newness 
and  will  erode  over  time.  The new  house  and  home  ownership 
create  more  change  than  tlie  community;  except  for  the  physi-
cally  isolated  housewife,  the woman who  misses  her parents, and 
the congenital  urbanite,  the  important move  is  not  from  city  to 
suburb but from  one population mix.  to another.  In fact,  hetero-
geneity-even  in  the supposedly  homogeneous  suburb-is prob-
ably  the major source of  unintended change  experienced  by  the 
Levittowners. 

As  I  suggested before,  Levittown's population mix is  typical of 
new suburbs, but can also be found in other new settlements, and 
changes in population mix face  many people who move.  Usually, 
movers pick a new residence with some knowledge of the popula-
tion mix, either "to be with the same kinds of people," or to have 
"better"  neighbors.  People  in  a  new  community,  like  those 
forced  to  relocate  by  urban  renewal,  lack  this  choice,  but while 
the  latter  often  suffer  as  a  result,  most  Levittowners  did  not. 
Critics  who  think  they  should  have  suffered  are  only  drawing 
conclusions about how they, as  upper middle class cosmopolitans, 
would feel  in  a  lower  middle class,  local,  and home-centered  en-
vironment.  Undoubtedly  they  would  have  been  depressed, 
bored,  and  lonely  in  Levittown-but  then,  Levittowners  would 
have  felt  the same way  if  they had moved  into the critics' midst. 
Although  I  have emphasized the changes,  the statistics also  in-
dicate  that  people's  lives  were  not  significantly  altered  by  the 
move.  As  Table 7  shows, 'the  "no  change"  percentage  is  usually 
the  largest.  Suburbia  allowed  people  to  live  more  comfortably 
and  feel  better,  which  is  what  they  wanted.  Some  participated 
more (or less)  in various aspects  of community life,  but the basic 
patterns  of  life  in  the  family,  in  the  home,  and  on  the  job  re-

•  :q6  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

mained  much  the  same,  and  the routines and  problems  of  daily 
existence  were  not  affected.  One  Levittowner  summarized  it 
well:  "I don't know how a new house changes your life. You  have 
a  pattern you go by, and that stays the same  no matter where you 
live."  The conclusion  I  reached  in  Part  One of this  book  about 
the new community  thus also  applies  to  individuals:  both  carry 
on old ways  in a new setting. 

These findings corroborate other studies.  For example,  Berger 
discovered  that a  group of factory  workers  held  to  their working 
class  ways  of living  when  they  bought  homes  in  a  new  tract  in 
suburban Milpitas, California, and remained steadfastly immune 
to both middle class  and suburban styles which they should have 
adopted  had  they  lived  up  to  what  he  calls  the  "suburban 
myth." 63  He  also  found  that  the  move  had  not  engendered  as-
pirations for occupational  or social mobility, either for the adults 
or  for  their  children,  but  had  provided  them-like  the  Levit-
towners-with  a  "new  feeling  of  well-being." 64  Wilner  and  his 
associates,  who studied a group of slum dwellers after their move 
into  a  new  public  housing  project,  discovered  the  same  thing: 
people  felt  better,  but  had  not  developed  new  aspirations  for 
work, children's education, or home ownership. 85 

Like my  interviews,  both  these studies  were conducted  two  to 
three  years  after  the move,  but Willmott  reported  that  the  peo-
ple of Dagenham, a  municipal housing project on the outskirts of 
London,  maintained  their working class  ways  during the  twenty 
to  forty  years  since  they  had" left  the  slums  of  that  city.  Some 
critics  have suggested  that the real  impact of the suburban move 
can  only  be  seen  in  the  next  generation,  and  that  the  children 
will  either  want  to  escape,  or  will  show  the  deleterious  conse-
quences  of  suburbia  when  they  grow  up.  In  Dagenham,  only  a 
few  of the second generation wanted to leave;  28  per cent of the 
original  settlers  reported  that  married  children  had  remained, 
and  that many others would  have  if housing had  been  available. 
Willmott also  found  that at least a  third of  those who left would 
have  preferred  to  stay  in  Dagenham.86  Some  did  move  out  vol-
untarily,  however,  having  adopted  middle  class  life  styles.  An 
American study, by Zelan,  found  that graduate sludents raised in 
the  suburbs  did  not  differ  in  intellectual  interests  from  those 
raised  in  the city,  casting doubt  on  the charges  that a  suburban 
childhood  leads to intellectual  debility.67 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  277  • 

TilE  SOURCES  OF  IMPACT 

To understand  Levittown's  impact  on  its  residents,  the  sources 
which  do and do  not  bring about behavior and  attitude change 
must be catalogued.  Knowing these sources allows  the planner or 
policy  maker  (I  will  use  these  terms  interchangeably  here)  68  to 
develop  plans  that  will  achieve  the  intended  goal.  The  sources 
can  be  classified  into  pre-occupancy  aspirations,  post-occupancy 
conditions,  and  extra-community  conditions.  Among  post-oc-
cupancy  conditions,  of  most  concern  to  the  planner  whose 
arena  is  the community,  are:  ( 1)  the  house  (and  the  move  from 
apartment  to  house);  (2)  the  settlement  type  (and  the  move 
from  city  to  suburb); 69  (3)  the  community  layout;  (4)  com-
munity  facilities,  public  and  commercial;  (5)  and  the  low 
density.  (These  five  sources  encompass  the  physical  characteris-
tics  of  the  community.)  The  social  characteristics  include:  (6) 
the population  mix and  (7)  the social  structure or array of com-
munity institutions. An  eighth source,  not directly related  to the 
community,  is  its  newness.  Among extra-community sources  are 
the area housing market, the regional  and national economy, and 
the national social structure and culture. A  policy-oriented analy-
sis  must also  identify spurious sources,  which have nothing to do 
with change. 

The House 

The  single  most  important  source  of  impact  is  undoubtedly 
the house,  even  though most of the changes  it encouraged  in  the 
lives of Levittowners were intended. The house is both a physical 
structure and an owned property. Among its  physical  characteris-
tics,  space  was  the  most  significant  source  of  change,  providing 
easier child-rearing,  more  room  for  family  activities,  and gTeater 
privacy to its members,  thereby reducing  family  friction  and in-
creasing contentment. 70  Modernity  encouraged  improved  house-
keeping  methods  and  allowed  a  bit  more  spare  time  for  wives. 
Both  house  and  yard  offered  opportunities for  initial  fixing  and 
furnishing,  and . also  for  more  lasting  decorating,  hobbies,  and 
other kinds of cultural self-expression.  They also  had unintended 
effects:  more family cohesion and change in spare time and spare-
time activity. 

Contentment results  principally  from  home  ownership,  how-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

ever,  particularly  among  men.  Aside  from  the  acquisition  of 
property and  its  monetary value,  ownership  brings  the freedom 
to do as one pleases and to indulge in forms of self-expression in-
side and  outside  the  house  that are not available  to a  tenant;  it 
permits  or encourages  familial  "settling  down"  and  provides  a 
public  symbol  of  achievement,  "something  to  show  for  all  your 
years  of  living,"  as  one  Levittowner  pointed  out.11  Ownership 
also  incorporates people  into  the  block and gives  some a  feeling 
of community belongingness which  may result in church, organi-
zational,  and  political  participation.  These  changes  last  only  so 
long as  people are satisfied with  the house as a  physical  structure 
and with  the community in which it sits,  and, of course,  they are 
most intense while the house and ownership are novel. 

Settlement  Type:  Suburb and City 

Generally speaking,  the changes  that could  be assigned  to  the 
move  from  city  to  suburb  alone  were  few;  they  came  through 
most clearly in the poorer adaptation of the Philadelphians.  Had 
similar changes  been  reported  by  urbanites  in  the random  sam-
ple,  they could  be  attributed  to  the  change  in  settlement  type, 
but for most Philadelphians it was not the move from city to sub-
urb, but the loss of a  specific set of social  ties located in a specific 
city.  They missed  parents and old friends,  but so did Transients 
who had grown up in small  towns and suburbs from which their 
jobs had taken them. All in all,  the city per se  (and  the leaving of 
it)  had little  impact on  people's live:r--and certainly not enough 
to encourage  them  to go  back  to  it;  the  impact resulted,  rather, 
from  the people they left  behind,  Levittown's shortage of urban 
facilities, and lack of transportation to the city. 

Conversely,  the  move  to  Levittown  as  a  suburban  settlement 
was a more important source of change. One consequence was the 
feeling  of  being stuck,  which  stems  partly  from  the  shortage  of 
commercial  "safety-valve"  areas.  Physical  isolation  is  not limited 
to  suburbia,  however,  for  some  women  were  stuck  in  the  city. 
Sometimes,  the lack  of shopping and window-shopping opportu-
nities  impels  neighb~ring, and  lack  of  entertainment  facilities 
encourages visiting with  other couples.  The discovery  that visit-
ing may  be  preferable to "being out on  the town"  qualifies  as  a 
significant unintended change of suburban living and of commu-
nity newness. 

Another consequence was  the slowdown  in  the  pace  of living, 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  279  • 

noted primarily by former city dwellers and men. It follows  from 
the ability  to  spend  more  time  in  the  house  and  yard,  activities 
for which one can set one's own pace;  the increase in outdoor liv-
ing,  which  may reduce  the energy and desire  to do other things; 
and  the availability  of friendly  people  nearby,  which  eliminates 
visiting that requires  travel.  The men,  who  report  increased  re-
laxation more than women, could avoid  participation in disliked 
parental and  in-law activities and escape  urban congestion.  Both 
sexes  also  called  attention  to  the  satisfactions  of  clean  air  and 
greenery  and  the  safety  of  the  relatively  traffic-free  residential 
neighborhoods.  But despite  the feeling of greater relaxation,  the 
suburbs actually  reduced  spare  time and  caused  a  major change 
in  leisure  activity;  gardening  (whether  it  was  fun  or  drudgery) 
and social  life  replacing some  mass-media  and  urban  diversions. 
Perhaps  the  most  significant  impact  of  the  suburb  was  on 
family finances.  Rising expenditures can be attributed to suburb-
related transportation costs,  higher taxes  (which resulted  primar-
ily  from  community  newness),  to  house-related  expenses  that 
come  with  a  single-family  house  and  home  ownership,  and  to  a 
higher standard of living that was  partly intended, partly a result 
of norms set by the population mix of the community. 

Finally,  the  suburban  location  meant  longer  commuting  for 
some, and was a source (albeit a  minor one)  for  a  variety of con-
sequences.  Short work  trips  provided more  time with  the  family 
and more joint activities, although increased  ones did not reduce 
it,  since  men  took  time  away from  other activities  instead.  Even 
so,  longer commuting did not affect  their spare  time or their so-
cial  and  organizational  activities.  Indeed,  the  main  burden  of 
commuting fell  on  the women;  they reported less  spare time and 
poorer dispositions  when  the man's  trip is  long.  The men  them-
selves were little affected  by trip length, being content so  long as 
they  did  not  have  to  use public  transportation.  Since  most  were 
not faced  with a significantly longer travel  time to work after the 
move, its overall  impact was negligible, and certainly not enough 
to make them unhappy about suburbia. 

Levittown as a Community:  The Physical  Environment 

Levittown  is  also  a  source  of  change  as  a  physical  and  social 
community,  but the various elements of the physical  community 
have  not  produced  a  significant  impact.  Although  they  are  laid 
out  according  to  the  precepts  of  the  traditional  neighborhood 

•  280  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

scheme, the individual neighborhoods do not affect people's lives. 
As  I  noted  earlier,  they  are  too  large  for  social  relations among 
their occupants, too similar to each other to encourage identifica-
tion,  and  without  distinctive  social  or  political  functions  that 
might  spawn  neighborhood  groups.  The  elementary  school,  lo-
cated in the middle of each  neighborhood, has not become a focal 
point.  Although  some atudents  identify  with  their  school,  over-
crowding  has  forced  busing  of  students  across  neighborhood 
lines.  School  meeting rooms  are used  almost every  night,  but by 
community-wide  groups,  not  neighborhood  ones  (except  for  the 
PTA). 

The  neighborhood  pool  is  a  center,  but  because  admission 
cards are issued only to neighborhood residents.  In theory, it pro-
vides  an  opportunity  for  members of  the  same  neighborhood  to 
meet,  but most  people come  to  the pool as  a  family  or in cliques, 
and  there  is  little  incentive  for  strangers  to  become  acquaint-
ed.72  It has  become  a  social  center  for  teenagers,  however,  and 
has  undoubtedly  helped  them  fmd  each  other.  Even  so,  I  doubt 
whether the pool  has created youthful  friendships on  the  basis of 
neighborhood  except,  perhaps,  among  children  of  elementary 
school  age,  for  older  ones  make  community-wide  contacts  at 
school  and  at  teenage  social  functions.  The  school  playgrounds 
programs  are  restricted  to  neighborhood  children,  but  after-
hours informal use of the playground attracts only those who live 
close  by;  it  is  not  interesting  enough  to  draw  neighborhood 
youngsters  who  live  farther  away.  The  small  shopping  centers, 
whether  planned  or  unplanned,  tend  to  be  on  the  edges  of  two 
neighborhoods,  and  thus  do  not  function  as  neighborhood  cen-
ters,  even  for  the  teenagers  who  gather  there.  The road  system, 
designed in conjunction with the neighborhoods to keep through 
traffic  out of  their  streets,  has  made  them  safer  for  playing chil-
dren, but it has also served to isolate people from other neighbor-
hoods.  The  curvature  of  internal  streets  makes  each  neigh-
borhood a  maze,  and  it is  easy for people  to get lost outside their 
own.  This  has  not  prevented  people  from  making  friends  in 
other  nei~·hborhoods, however,  or  restricted  them  to  socializing 
in  their own.i3 

The socially most significant unit is  the sub-block,  the sector of 
adjacent  houses  facing  each  other  on  the  street,  where  most 
neighbor  visiting and  mutual  help  takes  place.  It  exists  because 
people  need  neighbors,  but can  develop  only  a  limited  number 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

of social  relationships,  and  because  women  and  children  are  re-
stricted  in  their  mobility. 74  Of  course,  it  is  not a  real  physical 
unit, because  its size and boundaries are unique for each individ-
ual,  being determined  by  his gregariousness.  Sometimes  a  social 
isolate  becomes  the  boundary  between  sub-blocks,  but  sharp 
curves  in  the street  that  site  houses  away  from  each  other create 
the  only  physical  determinant  of  the  sub-block  (and  then  only 
rarely).  When  a  set  of  neighbors  is  very  friendly,  the  sub-block 
may  become  an  in-group  unit  with  which  people  identify,  but 
this  too  is  rare.  More  often,  they  see  other  blocks as  out-groups, 
marked  by  quarreling  or  deviant  behavior,  perhaps  to  assure 
themselves that their own is friendlier than most. 

Neither the sub-block,  the block, nor any other element in the 
site plan is  influential in determining friendships.  Propinquity is 
a  factor  while  people  get  to  know  each  other,  after  which  com-
patibility  becomes  the  major  criterion,  but  the  spaces  between 
houses  and  the  gentle  curvature  of  the  streets  put  enough  dis-
tance  between  people  to allow  them  to  ignore all  but next-door 
neighbors.  Even  the mixture of house  types  on  the street had lit-
tle  social  impact.  Although  class  differences  existed  between  the 
buyers of different  types,  the  variations  in  number of  bedrooms 
encouraged  people  to  make  family-size  rather  than  class  distinc-
tions. 75  Nor did people discriminate in their visiting on  the  basis 
of house  type.  As  a  result,  the gap of $3000 between  the cheapest 
and  most  expensive  house  on  the  block  had  no  impact on social 
life  or on neighbors' attitudes toward each other,  suggesting that 
differently  priced  houses  can  be  put next  to  each  other  without 
negative  results.  How  wide  the  price  gap  can  become  before  it 
has social consequences cannot be answered by my data. In a later 
development,  Bel  Air  (near  Washington),  Levitt  added  a  $25,-
ooo  house  to  the street mix but was  unable  to sell  it until  he lo-
cated  it  in  a  separate  neighborhood.  Presumably,  people  were 
unwilling to buy it amidst houses $5000 to $8ooo cheaper, but no 
reliable  data  are  yet  available  to  determine  how  high  a  price 
difference will discourage mixing of housetypes, and whether it is 
an absolute figure  or a  proportion of house price.  In any case, the 
Levittown  experience  suggests  that  mixing  is  feasible  when  the 
price gap between  the  most expensive and  least  expensive  house 
on the street is 20 per cent. 

Levitt's motive for mixing house types was esthetic;  he wanted 
to  avoid  the criticism  of architectural  monotony aroused  by ear-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

lier  Levittowns.  The critics  never  noticed  his  innovation,  how· 
ever,  the  Levittown  stereotype having become firmly  established 
by then, and the purchasers also  paid little attention to it.  People 
who  had  moved  from  the  physically  homogeneous  blocks  of 
Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  liked  the  mixture,  but  the  rest  were 
not concerned about architectural sameness.  Actually,  Levitt also 
used  a  highly  variegated  color  scheme  to  increase  diversity,  so 
that  only  every  15oth  house  was  alike;  besides,  purchasers  put 
their  individual  brand  on  the  house  and  yard  soon  after  they 
moved  in.  Their  image  of  other  houses  was  determined  not  by 
their  fa~ades,  but  by  their  occupants,  so  that  (for  neighbors  at 
least)  every  house  quickly  became  unique.  None  of  the  adults 
who  thought  Levittown  dull  ascribed  the  dullness  to  architec-
tural homogeneity. 

More  important  than site  plan and street layout was  the com-
munity's  low  density.  Although  it  was  not  especially  low  as 
suburban areas go--most lots were only 65oo square feet-houses 
10 feet apart gave  people a  sense of privacy.  Even so,  many Levit-
towners  preferred  a  lower  density,  to  put  more  space  between 
them and incompatible neighbors and because lot size is an index 
of status in American society. The low density had some negative 
consequences for  cultural  minorities, separating them  from  com-
patible  neighbors.  For  example,  adolescent  gathering  places  at 
the  shopping  centers  were  beyond  walking  distance,  although 
many teenagers soon coped with it by acquiring bicycles. 

Architects and planners insist that every community must have 
a  single  physical  and  symbolic  center,  but  Levittown,  like  most 
suburban  communities,  lacked  such  a  nucleus.  The main  shop-
ping center was  located  at  the  edge  of the community  to  attract 
outside  purchasers,  but since  it was  still  under construction  dur-
ing the  time of my study,  its impact on people's lives  was  hard to 
define.  It served not only as  a  shopping area but as a  place where 
local  businessmen  (and  mothers)  could  meet  for  lunch and  as  a 
location for occasional community ceremonies. City hall, closer to 
the  geographical  midpoint  of  the  community,  was  its  civic  and 
political  center,  although  the  meetings  of  the  Township  Com· 
mittee  did  not  attract many  residents;  those  meetings for  which 
a  large  turnout could  be  expected were  held  in  a  school  audito-
rium, as  were school  board meetings.  Other centers were the high 
school athletic field, where varsity teams bearing the community's 
name  performed,  and  the  parking  lot  of  the  shopping  center, 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

where 15,ooo people welcomed  the late President Kennedy when 
he campaigned  in  Levittown. 

It  is  doubtful  whether  Levittown  needed  a  single  nucleus,  or 
whether its existence would have created a  major impact on  peo-
ple's lives.  Few  events  are  of interest  to  a  significant  proportion 
of Levittowners,  so  that  the community is  not likely  to come  to-
gether as a group. In most cities, demand for and use of centers is 
generated by tourists, for  the center is  the area they want to visit. 
In  a  heterogeneous  community,  the  center's  historically  and 
otherwise  sacred  landmarks  may  serve  as  a  cohesive  symbol  for 
those  few  residents  who  need  to  identify  with  the  community; 
more often,  the center is  most  important to local  interest groups 
who want  to  promote a  cohesive  feeling  (civic  pride) among citi-
zens  to  obtain  political  support,  hide community conflict,  or re-
duce the dissension that comes with heterogeneity. Levittown has 
as  much  heterogeneity and conflict  as  any other community,  but 
neither  would  have  been  reduced  by  a  real  or  symbolic  center. 
For  most  Levittowners,  their  own  home  was  the  center  of  the 
community, and  that determined  the  town's  social  structure and 
politics. 

The Social  Environment 

Most  of  the  changes  following  upon  the  move  to  Levittown 
can be traced to the social community, to the impact of people on 
each other. The increased visiting, organizational activity, church 
attendance,  altered  leisure  pursuits;  the  changes  in  health,  mo-
rale,  boredom, and loneliness;  and even some of the new worries 
resulted  neither  from  the  move  to  the  suburb  nor  from  the 
suburbanness of Levittown or its physical  environment, but from 
the  contact  or  lack  of  contact  with  other  people  in  Levittown, 
and  this  in  turn can  be  traced  ultimately to  the population mix. 
The homogeneity of that mix was  the  major source of social  life 
and  the  benefits  to  morale  that  followed;  its  heterogeneity  was 
largely  responsible  for  social  isolation  and  the  resulting  emo-
tional costs. 

A  second  source  of change was  the social  structure.  The need 
for  organizations  to spring into existence  brought about some of 
the  increased organizational participation,  and  the desire of peo-
ple  to  feel  themselves  a  part  of  the  community  (by  which  they 
meant the social structure) encouraged it and religious activity as 
well.  But the social  structure was  also  a  result of the  population 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

mix,  for  it determined  what organizations and  institutions were 
viable,  and  organizational  participation  in  turn  depended  on 
whether members found each  other compatible. The functioning 
of  the  social  structure  was  enhanced  by  two  other  sources:  the 
random  settling  of  purchasers,  that  is,  people's  choosing  their 
houses  without  knowing  who  would  live  next  door;  and  the 
openness of  the  structure itself,  which at  first  admitted  everyone 
who  wanted  to  participate.  When  people  moved  in,  they  were 
atomistic  family  units,  placed  together  arbitrarily,  who  had  to 
trust each other to be friendly  and cooperative  in order to set up 
the  formal  and  informal  groups that would  eliminate  the  initial 
atomization.  This could only be achieved  by an  open,  universal-
istic,  and  achievement-oriented  social  structure,  which  judged 
people  by  what  they  did,  not  what  they  were.  The  random 
settling  hastened  the  development  of  organizations  for  those 
who could not find  compatible  neighbors and was  a  direct  cause 
of  increased  organizational  activity.  For  those  unable  to  join, 
random  settling also  produced  physical  and  social  isolation  by 
scattering people  with  minority tastes,  as  well  as  those  who  had 
come  out  of  cohesive  ethnic  and  working  class  areas  where 
settling  had  been  anything  but  random.  Even  so,  the  openness 
of the social structure probably kept the number of social isolates 
to  a  minimum. 76 

The open social  structure was,  of course, a  direct consequence 
of  newness,  as  was  some  of  the  initial  visiting,  the  unintended 
organizational participation, the reduced boredom and loneliness 
felt  by  Philadelphians, some  of the joint family  activity,  and  the 
change  in spare-time activity.  Newness  alone  was  not enough  to 
explain the increased social  activity,  however,  for  if the strangers 
who came  together had been  more heterogeneous in background 
and characteristics,  the first  meetings could well  have  resulted in 
conflict and a  general retreat into the safety of home and family. 
Because people were sufficiently homogeneous to trust each other, 
they could share the common pains of newness and the needs of a 
new community and act  together in  the ways  that  produced  the 
behavior  changes  here  reported.  Ultimately,  then,  the  p-rimary 
source of change  was  the population mix of Levittown. 

TilE AGENTS  OF IMPACT 

Behavior  changes  must  be  traced  beyond sources,  to agents and 
agencies  that  have  some  influence  over  them,  particularly since 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  285  • 

policies for change can be effective only if they can assign respon-
sibility  to  agents  within  or  without  the  community.  Obviously, 
Levitt was a  major agent of change, for  without him there would 
have  been  no  Levittown,  but  not all  of  the  firm's  decisions  and 
decision-makers  were  important.  For  example,  those  designing 
the  physical  community  were  not,  but  those  creating  the  Levitt 
houses  were  crucial.  Levitt's  mass  production  techniques  made 
it possible to build an entire community, and at a  price that pro-
vided  the opportunity for  home  ownership  to  people who could 
not have  moved  to  the suburbs otherwise.  Of course,  the federal 
government  played  a  role  as  well,  for  without  FHA  insurance, 
Levitt could not have kept either the price or the down  payment 
as  low as  he did.  Mass  production  also  made  it  possible  to  maxi-
mize the space of the house, which in turn enhanced family activ-
ities and individual  privacy (for adults)  and  thus  improved  their 
morale. 

Since the behavior changes brought about by the house and by 
home ownership were largely intended ones,  Levitt did not really 
change  people's  lives.  He  (and  FHA)  enabled  people  to  achieve 
their aspirations for  home ownership,  but he did not bring these 
aspirations  into  being.  The  most  important  agents  of  change, 
therefore,  were  the  aspirations  themselves  and  the  processes  of 
purchaser  recruitment  that  determined  the  population  mix. 
These  processes  cannot  be  ascribed  either  to  Levitt  or  to  any 
other single  agent.  He designed  houses  that served  the  needs  of 
young  families  with  children,  but  he  made  no  effort  to  attract 
young families  and had  in  fact  no policies of purchaser selection 
other than race;  until  the community was  integrated, he  took all 
whites who  wished  to  buy and could pass  the credit check.  This 
was  standard  suburban  builder  practice,  as  was  the  random 
settling pattern.  Both  were,  furthermore,  responses  to  purchaser 
preferences;  houses  were  built  for  young  families  because  they 
have been the mainstay of the suburban housing market for  over 
a decade, and communities were settled randomly because people 
came as  individual family units. If they had come as  a clan or as a 
clique of friends, Levitt would have been glad to sell  them an en-
tire  block or two.  Even  Levitt's decision  to  offer  houses  within  a 
narrow  price  range  was  a  standard  builder  practice,  which  re-
sponded  to  property  value  and  status  concerns  among  the  pur-
chasers. 

Thus,  people's  preferences  as  purchasers  led  to  builder  prac-
tices,  which  in  turn  produced  the  population  mix.  l:!lJ-~m_ately, 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

then,  people  wert:  their  own  agents,  and  the  changes  that  came 
about as  a  result  of the  move were created  by  the  pressures  and 
aspirations which  led them to the suburban builders.  The princi-
pal  pressures  were  the  lack  of  space  and  modernity  of  today's 
middle-income  urban  housing  stock,  the  deterioration  and  con-
gestion of the cities, and the normal and ceaseless processes of in-
vasion and succession  that bring about neighborhood population 
change.  Some  Philadelphians  were  pushed  by  the  expansion  of 
the Negro ghetto, others by the desire to escape from  the parental 
generation;  the  Transients  were  impelled  by  the  needs  of  their 
corporate  employers.  The  principal  aspirations  were  for  a  de-
tached  house,  home  ownership.  and  "outdoor"  living.  These as-
pirations and the conditions that made it possible to realize them 
are  the  final  source-and-agent  of  Levittown's  impact,  and  they 
can  be  traced  back to more fundamental  sources  and agents  out-
side  the  community,  in  the  national  culture  and  economy. 

Many explanations have been offered for  the intense desire for 
home  ownership  and  the  single-family,  low-density  house.  Some 
have  pointed  to  post-World War II government  policies making 
it cheaper to own than to rent. These policies encouraged people 
to buy houses and discouraged apartment living, but they did not 
create  the  desire.  Others  have  argued  that  it  results  from  mass 
media depictions of  an  idealized suburbia.  Admittedly, much of 
the  popular fiction,  in  print and on television,  takes  place  in lo-
cales  which  cross  the  nineteenth  century  small  town  with  the 
modern suburb, but they do not therefore inspire their audiences 
to  move  to  the  suburbs.  For  one  thing,  research  shows  that  the 
media are not very  effective in changing important values.  More 
important,  a  historical  analysis  of  the  media  would  show  that 
they  follow  taste  more  often  than  they  lead  it.  Women  were 
smoking  in  America  before  heroines  of mass  media  fiction  were 
allowed  to do  so,  and  the dominant  media audience  had  moved 
to the suburbs before the popular dramas and situation comedies 
followed  them.  Stories about upper class  suburbanites have  been 
a staple of American popular culture for  several generations now, 
but media  portrayal  of  lower  middle  class  life  has  been  located 
in  the suburbs for only a  few  years. 

Another explanation  proceeds  from  status:  the  popular desire 
for suburban  home ownership  imitates  the  fashion-setting  upper 
and  upper  middle  classes.  This  argument  is  historically  more 
viable than  that of mass media imitation, because higher-income 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

groups have lived in the suburbs since before the turn of the cen-
tury.  The  dream  home  of  most  Levittowners  is  not  the  Main 
Line or Westchester County suburban mansion,  however,  but "a 
bigger  house  with  some  acreage  around  it,"  a  tiny  farm  (not  to 
be farmed)  with all  the conveniences of urban and suburban liv-
ing,  including easy  access  to  social  life.  This  dream  residence  is 
not of recent origin, but is  rooted in the cultures of most Ameri-
cans,  Protestant  and  Catholic,  middle  class  and  working  class 
alike.  Among  middle  class  Protestants,  the  home-ownership  as-
piration can  be traced  back  to the rural and small-town  heritage 
of  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  century  America  and  England; 
among working class Catholics,  to  the peasant settlements of con-
tinental  Europe.  Only the Jews did not share this rural  heritage, 
and although acculturation has persuaded many to accept it, Jews 
are  still  more  favorably  inclined  to  city  living  than  any  other 
group. 77  The  mass  media  have  promulgated  the  Protestant  and 
Catholic  ideal,  and  in  their  own  way,  so  have  the  upper classes 
-but they have not generated it, for it preceded them both. Even 
if the American  upper classes  had opted for  an  urbane existence 
in  inner<ity  luxury  apartment  buildings,  I  doubt  whether  the 
desire for suburbia among the rest of the population would have 
been  significantly reduced.  Actually,  even  the ideal  of the celeb-
rities  and  performers  who  monopolize  what  little  upper  class 
fashion-setting  exists  is  not  apartment  living,  but a  Manhattan 
townhouse and a  weekend country mansion-also a single-family 
house aspiration. 

The American economy of the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries  made  the  traditional  popular  housing  ideal  unachiev-
able,  industrialization  and  urbanization  forcing.  many  rural 
Americans,  like  the  European  immigrants,  into city  tenements. 
They  lived  there  out  of  necessity,  and  made  the  best  of  it,  al-
though  some  became  confirmed  urbanites  and  tenants.  But  the 
majority  moved  out  at  the  earliest  opportunity,  first  to  row 
houses,  then  to  single-family  houses  still  within  the city  but far-
ther removed from  its center with every generation. After World 
\Var II,  however,  prosperity and government housing policy  put 
suburbia  within  reach  of  the  urban  lower  middle  and  working 
classes.  Of course.  if the government had decided to subsidize ur-
ban  apartments  instead,  many  would  have  moved  into  them. 
This would  not  have  abrogated  their aspirations,  but only  frus-
'trated  and  postponed  them.  Government  policy  is  not  made  in 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

vacuo,  however,  and  the  elected  officials  who  decided  to  sub-
sidize suburbia were aware of their constituents' aspirations.  Per-
haps  they could have  ignored  them,  especially during the drastic 
housing shortage of the postwar era,  but politicians are not given 
to crossing the voters unnecessarily, and there was no good reason 
for.them  to do so at the time. 

The move  to  the  suburbs was  encouraged  further  by rapid so-
cial  change, which created large differences between generations, 
eroded  the  ties  that held ethnic groups together,  and encouraged 
young families  to  leave  the parental environment. Young  people 
have always been most mobile, but today they marry increasingly 
outside  their own neighborhood and  this  too reduces loyalties  to 
older areas.  In addition, many want to give their children a  "bet-
ter start," so  that they are almost inevitably led to a  new environ-
ment in the suburbs . 

. THEORETICAL AND  POLICY IMPLICATIONS 

The  findings  on  changes  and  their  sources  suggest  that  the  dis-
tinction  between  urban  and  suburban  ways  of  living  postulated 
by  the  critics  (and  by  some  sociologists  as  well)  is  more  imagi-
nary than real.  Few changes can  be  traced  to  the  suburban qual-
ities of Levittown, and the sources that did cause change, like  the 
house,  the  population  mix,  and  newness,  are  not  distinctively 
suburban.  Moreover,  when  one  looks  at  similar  populations  in 
city and  suburb,  their ways  of life  are  remarkably alike.  For  ex-
ample, when suburbs are compared to the large urban residential 
areas  beyond  the  downtown  and  inner  districts,  culture  and  so-
cial  structure are virtually the same among people of similar age 
and  class.  Young  lower  middle  class  families  in  these  areas  live 
much  like  their  peers  in  the  suburbs,  but  quite  unlike  older, 
upper middle  class  ones,  in  either  urban  or suburban  neighbor-
hoods. 

The crucial difference between cities and suburbs, then, is  that 
they are often home for different kinds of people. If one is  to un-
derstand  tDeir  behavior,  these differences  are  much  more  impor-
tant  than  whether  they  reside  inside  or  outside  the  city  limits. 
Inner-city  residential  areas  are  home  to  the  rich,  the  poor,  and 
the  nonwhite,  as  well  as  the unmarried and  the  childless  middle 
class.  Their  ways  of  life  differ· from  those  of  suburbanites  and 
people in the outer city, but because they are not young working 

•  289  • 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 
or lower or upper  middle class  families.  If populations and  resi-
dential  areas  were  described  by age  and class  characteristics,  and 
by racial, ethnic, and religious ones, our understanding of human 
settlements  would  be  much  improved.  Using  such  concepts  as 
"urban"  and  "suburban"  as  causal  variables  adds  little,  on  the 
other  hand,  except  for  ecological  and  demographic  analyses  of 
communities  as  a  whole  and  for  studies  of  political  behavior. 78 
The  findings  also  question  a  related  theory,  espoused  by  city 
planners,  that the community, especially  its  physical  component, 
is  a  significant determinant  of  behavior.  The  social  community 
is  important, of course,  particularly  in  a  politically autonomous 
settlement  which  can  determine  its  own  fate.  Nevertheless  the 
intended changes made by the members of that community came 
from  their aspirations,  which  originated outside  the  community 
in national cultural patterns;  even  the unintended ones  reflected 
social  and  organizational  practices  prevalent  in national  middle 
and  working class  cultures.  For example,  when  low-status  Levit-
towners  became  social  isolates,  they  suffered  from  nationally de-
termined status distinctions, and when Jews  increased  their syna-
gogue  attendance,  they  acted  like  all  Jews  who  settle  randomly 
amid a predominantly non-Jewish population. 

Likewise,  city  planners  overes~imate the  role  of  builders  and 
designers as  agents  of change.  Not only are builder policies  are-
sponse  to  the demands of expected purchasers,  but they are  usu-
ally  national  practices,  which  in  turn  follow  from  national  cul-
tural  patterns.  Levitt's  recruitment  policies  reflected  national 
preferences  for  age  and  class  homogeneity,  and  the  breakup  of 
extended families  and ethnic enclaves.  He could have developed 
an  individual recruitment pattern, for  example,  to create a  dem-
ographically  "balanced"  community,  but  only  by  luring  pres-
ently  recalcitrant  urbanites  out  of  the  city  and  rejecting  many 
willing  young  families.  Even  the  subsidies  and  restraints  with 
which  he  worked  originated  from  federal  and  state  more  than 
local  government.  Moreover,  the  population  mix  he  did  recruit 
was  only  partially  pulled  by  the  house  and  community  he 
offered,  and  often  pushed  by  demographic  changes  in  Phila-
delphia  (again  reflections  of national  trends),  by  the  makeup  of 
the regional  housing market  and  its  offerings,  and  by  a  regional 
and national economy that was shifting offices and factories  to the 
suburbs generally and to South Jersey in particular. 

Plans  and  policies  aimed  at  changing  people's  behavior  can 

•  290  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNEBS 

therefore not be implemented through prescribing alterations in 
the physical  community or by directives aimed at  builders;  they 
must be directed at  the national sources and agents which bring 
about  the  present  behavior.  The fact  that  policies  for  changing 
behavior  must  be  based  on  other  foundations  does  not  mean, 
however,  that policies with different aims, e.g.  to minimize traffic 
congestion, and  to regulate builder practices for  other goals,  e.g. 
to outlaw shoddy construction, should be abandoned. 

Planning for Behavior Change 

These conclusions may be  truisms,  but they have  implications 
for  the policy-maker who  is  seeking change  in  people's behavior 
or  in  the  community.  If he wants  to change  a  social  or  physical 
component of the community, he must first determine whether it 
affects  residents'  crucial  aspirations  or values.  If it does,  he  has 
three alternatives:  to make no change, to alter the component so 
that  it  will  achieve  the  aspirations  in  another  way,  or  to  alter 
aspirations so  that people will  accept  the changed component he 
has in mind. If the component is not a source of valued behavior, 
the policy-maker has more freedom,  for if his plan has no impact 
on  people's  lives,  they will  not  car~ one way  or  the other.  The 
city planner has often been able to make innovations in site plans 
and in the physical community for  this reason. 

If the policy-maker seeks to change a component of behavior, he 
must find  out if it is valued or situational, i.e., a  tolerated or un-
wanted adaptation to necessity. If the behavior is valued, he must 
either satisfy or change  the values;  if it is  situational, he is  freer 
to  plan.  In either case  he must,  of course,  orient his  plan  to  the 
proper sources  and  agents  of  behavior.  For  example,  a  planner 
aiming for more community participation can try to change aspi-
rations, which  would be quite difficult,  requiring a wholesale so-
cial  reorganization  to  transfer  the  emotional  rewards  of  family 
and  informal  group life  to  the community.  Or he can affect  the 
sources of participation, by depriving a  new community of insti-
tutions so  that people have  to create them and by inducing com-
munity crises, for these always stimulate participation. 

The city  planner has  traditionally chosen  the most difficult of 
his options:  to change people's aspirations so  that they will accept 
a  community  component  he  considers  desirable.  And  he  has 
chosen  the  most  spurious  of  all  solutions:  to  induce  behavior 
change through a physical component. "Educating" people to ac-

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  291  • 

cept  the  cultural,  moral,  or  economic  superiority  of  his  ideal 
community has not been very effective, however,  for  preaching is 
rarely  attended  and  few  people  are  persuaded  by  an  argument 
which  attacks  their  behavior as  inferior  and  their  aspirations as 
unworthy.  When  the  physical  component  and  the  behavioral-
change goal  turn  out  to  be  values  of  upper  middle  class  profes-
sionals as  well,  other classes  may reject  the  planner as  well  as  his 
plan. 

Aspirations  are  difficult  to  change  deliberately;  even  adver-
tisers have not yet come up with an effective method. This is  just 
as well,  for such power is awesome and likely to be misused more 
often  than  not.  Most  often, aspirations change as  a  result of nec-
essary  behavior  change:  if  a  transformation  in  the  economy  or 
the  social  structure requires  people  to act differently,  their aspi-
rations  will  eventually  change  accordingly.  Necessity  cannot 
often  be  manipulated  by  the  policy-maker,  however.  Probably 
the  best deliberate  method of changing aspirations  is  to  provide 
people  with  alternative  opportunities  that  are  by  their  lights 
clearly  superior;  this  policy  will  result  in  behavior change  and, 
eventually,  in value change  as  well.  New  aspirations are formed 
OQt  of new opportunities, provided these  opportunities appeal to 
some  present aspiration,  for  otherwise they  will  not be accepted. 
City  planners  are  geared  to  providing  new  opportunities,  but 
usually those they find desirable, and without concern about how 
other  people feel.  Often,  they deny  that people have aspirations, 
arguing that  they  do  not  know  what  they  want,  and will  there-
fore  be receptive  to whatever the planner considers superior. Al· 
though  people  may  not  know  what  they  want,  they  know  what 
they do not want;  more important,  they are able to choose when 
choices  are  offered  them.  It is  up  to  the  planner  to  offer  such 
choices,  and  if  he  proposes  choices  that  reflect  people's  aspi-
rations,  they  will  be accepted;  if not,  they  will  be  ignored. 

Needless  to  say,  the  policy-maker  must  sometimes  advocate 
policies that do not coincide with people's aspirations, but are re-
quired  by  the  public  interest,  for  example,  transportation  facil-
ities  to  prevent  the  future  traffic  congestion  his  studies  predict. 
Preventive planning demands present sacrifices for future gain, a 
behavior  change  most  people  are  unwilling  to  make,  unless  in-
centives,  such  as  tax  benefits  for  long-range  planning,  are  pro-
vided.  In  appealing  to  the  public  interest,  the  planner must  be 
careful, however, that he is not just imposing his own aspirations. 
If he  considers  traffic  congestion  or  a  long commuting trip  un-

•  292  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

desirable,  but  the  commuters do  not,  he  must  provide  evidence 
for  his proposals.  If he can prove that failure  to plan will  lead to 
consequences  which  people  consider  harmful  (for  example,  if a 
long journey to work would eventually lead to chronic weariness 
and  family  conflict),  he is  justified  in trying to impose  his  plans, 
although wise  strategy would dictate combining them with other 
plans that offer incentives. He can also insist on his ideas if he can 
demonstrate that people will be pleased once they have made the 
change.  In both instances,  however,  he  must be able  to prove  to 
his clients that the outcome of his planning will accord with their 
aspirations,  not  just  his.  But  if  there  are  no  serious  negative 
consequences  to  a  long  journey  to  work,  the  -planner  cannot 
expect people  to make sacrifices  just because  he  thinks a  shorter 
journey would be good for  them. 

The attempt to induce behavior change through physical com-
ponents  is  of  course  likely  to  fail,  because  it deals  with spurious 
sources and agents.  Indeed, the Levittown data make it clear that 
the  only  physical  planning  which  induces  behavior  change  is 
house-related.  The  policy-maker  can  increase  contentment  by 
providing  sufficient  internal  and  yard  space  to  afford  family 
members  greater  privacy  and  opportunities  for  more  activity. 
And if  his  house  planning is  superior,  people may  be willing to 
accept  innovations  in  the physical  community, but if he suggests 
innovations at the price of an inferior house." he is  sure to  fail.  If 
the  policy-maker wants  to increase  neighborhood cohesion,  how-
ever,  physical solutions such as neighborhood schemes or the pro-
vision  of  plazas  where  neighbors  can  meet  are  irrelevant,  for  so 
long as  neighbors  have  no  reason  to  meet,  they  will  not  do  so. 
Cohesion  can  only  be  increased  by  making  the  neighborhood  a 
political unit, or by so altering the family that people will derive 
more  satisfaction  from  being  with  neighbors  than  with  spouse 
and children.  Such  policies  are  not  likely  to  be  popular or  fea-
sible.  If the  policy-maker  wanted  to  increase  family  cohesion  or 
contentment,  however,  his  plans  would  probably  be  accepted. 
But these would  have  to  improve  the  house  or deal  with  the  so-
cial sources  of family  discontent described  in  the  previous  chap-
ter:  by  finding  ways  of  reducing  physical  and  social  isolation 
among  unhappy  suburban  housewives,  eliminating  husbands' 
traveling on the  job, and removing financial  worries. 

A  good  illustration  of  the  various  drawbacks  in  the  city 
planner's approach is  his current advocacy of higher-density sub-

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

urban  development.  He  and  his  colleagues  argue  for  suburban 
row  house and apartment construction  because  they  believe  that 
the  single-family  house  wastes  land,  encourages  urban  sprawl, 
increases  commuting,  makes  for  a  physically  monotonous  com· 
munity,  and discourages  an  urbane way of living.  Few  actual  or 
potential  suburbanites share  these attitudes,  because  they do not 
accept the business efficiency concept and the upper middle class, 
antisuburban  esthetic  built  into  them.  In  this  instance,  the 
planner  is  asking  people  to  change  their  aspirations  to  accept  a 
physical.community he considers desirable,  demanding behavior 
change  through a  new physical  form,  and  ignoring their own as· 
pirations.  Typically,  he  claims  that  if  people  woJ.Ild  only  try  a 
modern row  house,  they would accept  it, but he  has  not yet con-
vinced  them that it provides the privacy and status of the single-
family house, and they are loath to give up private yards for more 
public open  space,  which would require  them  to sacrifice  family 
privacy for involuntary interaction with neighbors. 

Land shortages  may well  require  the  next generation  of home 
buyers  to  live  in row  house suburbs,  but if  planning were  sensi-
tive  to  their  aspirations,  consumer  research  and  design  experi-
mentation  to develop  plans that wi~l please  them would  now be 
under  way.  If city  planners  were  rational,  they  would  also  stop 
trying  to  impose  their  desire  for  urbanity,  particularly  through 
physical  solutions.  They could  either  retire  this  goal  and design 
for  improved "suburbanity," or they  could  begin  to  plan  on  the 
basis of the real sources of urbanity.  Since  it is  to  be found  prin-
cipally among  upper  middle  class  cosmopolitans,  the  solution  is 
to develop ways  of giving people upper middle class  incomes and 
job opportunities and cosmopolitan schooling for  their children. 
So  fat;- I  have asked  whether  the  planner can  change  behavior 
and aspirations,  but have  begged  the question of whether or not 
he should.  If Levittown were as  harmful  as  the critics claim and 
as  undesirable as  the city  planners believe,  the answer  would  be 
obvious. Since this is  not the case,  however, the planner's decision 
about  change  should  be  governed  by  two  assumptions:  (1)  in  a 
pluralistic  society,  alternative  ways  of  living-and  community 
arrangements-are  justified,  provided  they  are  not  clearly  anti-
social  or individually destructive;  (2)  the  people for whom he  is 
planning are  on  the  whole  the  best judges  of how  they  want  to 
live.  The  planner may  prefer urbanity,  but unless  he can  prove 
other alternatives  to  be  harmful,  this  preference  only gives  him 

•  294  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

the  right  to  practice  it  himself.  The  key  word  is  prove,  for  if 
people's wishes have harmful consequences,  he  ought  to propose 
change and  use all  possible means  to  implement  it.  Even  so,  the 
consequences  must  be  harmful  for  them  and  their  aspirations 
and  not  just for  his;  or they must be demonstrably antisocial  or 
self-destructive.  Obviously,  people's wishes  to destroy  themselves 
and  harm  their  neighbors  through  drug  addiction  cannot  be 
accepted,  but  their  willingness  to  accept  long  work  trips  in ex· 
change  for  lower  residential  density  should  be  honored,  unless 
superior ways of achieving the family goals  that  underlie the de-
sire  for  low  density  can  be  found.  Likewise,  if  the  planner can 
prove  that  changes  people  consider  undesirable  may  actually 
benefit  them  and  the  goals  they  value most,  he ought  to defend 
such  changes.  For example,  if  the  planner can  demonstrate  that 
the  introduction  of apartments  into  a  single-family  house  com-
munity-a change  most  suburbanites oppose-will  reduce  their 
taxes  or permit improvements in municipal  services  of  the  kind 
they  want,  he  is  justified in  proposing change.  If people  prefer, 
however,  to  pay  higher  taxes  to  maintain  the  status  and  other 
values  they derive  from  limiting the community to single-family 
housing,  they  have  the  right  to  do  so. 

One problem remains:  when people in a community do not all 
have the same aspirations and when the choice is not between the 
community and  the  planner,  but between  the community and a 
larger area.  For example, some suburban residents may favor  the 
introduction  of  high-rise  housing,  but when  opinions  vary,  ma-
jority rule should prevail.  A community may be united in its op-
position to high-rise housing, but the region may need it and the 
best location for it may be in that community. There is no simple 
answer  to  this  dilemma.  The needs of the region  ought  to  have 
priority  over the  community's,  if  only because  of  majority  rule, 
but  some  minority  rights  must  remain  absolute.  The  desire  to 
keep out apartments does not fall  into this category,_but the right 
of Negroes to enter a community when the majority of white res-
idents  opposes  them  is  constitutionally  inalienable.  If behavior 
change must be imposed, however, it ought to include incentives. 
For example, when opposition to integration stems from fears  of 
status deprivation the change ought to be planned so as  to mini-
mize  it,  by  making sure  the  first  Negroes  are  of  high  status,  by 
helping newcomers with financial  aid so  that visible signs of low 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  295  • 

status can be removed, and by scheduling integration so that peo-
ple of different status are not  thrown  together arbitrarily. 

Planning values  like neighborhood cohesion  and  urbanity are 
not absolute values, however, and cannot be used to justify rejec-
tion of people's aspirations. The city planner's professional status 
entitles him to apply his professional expertise and to propose his 
own  values,  but  not  to  insist  on  them.  These  are  rarely  profes-
sional  ones anyway,  but  those  of  the  upper  middle class  culture 
from  which  he  comes.  More  important,  his  approach  often  de-
mands  allegiance  to  such  values  from  people  who  lack  the  eco-
nomic and other opportunities that create  them, so  that he is  de-
manding upper middle class  standards--and  ~sing public  power 
to  back  up  his  demands--without  providing  for  upper  middle 
class  incomes.  This  is  like  insisting  that  poor  people  buy  Cad-
illacs  simply  because  they  are  demonstrably  superior  to  Chev-
rolets.  If the quality of life  is  to  be altered,  economic and  other 
incentives ought to be made available. Voluntary and wanted be-
havior changes can be encouraged in other ways,.  but involuntary 
ones are  difficult  to  implement,  and  their  imposition  should  be 
limited  to  goals  that  reflect  the  public  interest  and  minority 
rights. 

NOTES 

1.  The  principal  studies  are  Mogey  (1956),  Young  and  Willmott, 
Hole,  Ktsanes  and  Reissman,  Mogey  and  Morris,  Berger  (196o), 
Willmott (1963),  Dobriner (1963),  and Clark. 

2.  In this analysis "commJ..Inity"  is defined in the  traditional sense  to 
include  all  of  the  physical  and  social  components  of  human  set-
tlements. 

3·  People were asked,  "How has  your  life changed since you  moved 

to Levittown?" 

4·  The major unintended changes at this  point were  increased joint 

family  activity,  organizational  participation,  and visiting. 

5·  Slum  dwellers  who moved  to  a  new  public housing  project-but 
into apartments--showed  an  increase  in  a  variety  of measures  of 
morale, but not much more than a control group moving into old 
private housing. See  Wilner et al.,  Chap.  15. 

6.  Seventy-two per cent ascribed  the  increase  in joint family  activity 

to the house  and yard. 

7·  Slum dwellers moving into new public housing apartments lacked 

•  296  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

the  stimulus  of  the  house,  for  they  reported  almost  no  change 
in joint family  activity  and marital relations after the move.  Wil-
ner et al.,  Chap.  1 1. 

8.  In  the  first  interview,  75  per cent of  the  random  sample  credited 
the  house  and  12  per  cent  the  community;  by  the  second  inter-
view,  the percentages were  37  and 37· Among the Philadelphians, 
54  per  cent  credited  the  house,  23  per  cent  credited  the  com-
munity. 

g.  Mogey  (1955),  p.  125;  Mogey  (1956),  p.  72;  Young and  Willmott, 

P·  119. 

10.  Since  husbands  never  missed  relatives,  this  analysis  was  limited 
to  women.  Fifty-five  per  cent  of  those  not  missing  relatives  got 
along  better  with  their  husbands,  as  compared  to  none  of  those 
who  did  miss  them. 

11.  Kiser's  careful  study  of  the  number  of  third  children  born  to  a 
national  sample  discovered  little  difference  in  births  between  ur· 
ban and suburban  parents of the  same  religion, or between those 
moving within  the city and from  city  to suburb. 

12.  Fifty·seven  per  cent  of  the  Philadelphians  with  unplanned  chil-
dren were  Catholics;  28  per cent were  poorly educated non-Cath-
olics.  Even  if one  assumed  that  neither  practiced  birth  control, 
this still leaves  15  per cent "accidents." 

13.  Seventy-three  per  cent  of  those  wanting  more  neighboring  re-
ported an increase,  and  75  per cent of  those  wanting less  also got 
their  wish.  Altogether,  62  per  cent  of  the  respondents  did  the 
amount  of  neighboring  they  wanted.  For couple  visiting,  the  fig-
ures were slightly lower:  only 53  per cent wanting more were able 
to  achieve it; altogether, only 44  per cent got what they wanted. 
14.  Fifty-six  per cent  of changes  in  couple  visiting  were  unintended. 
Thirty-one per cent of those who had wanted no change did more, 
and  10  per cent  of those  wanting more  did  less.  Thirty-eight  per 
cent of changes in neighboring were  unintended,  and 42  per cent 
of  those  wanting  no  change  actually  found  themselves  doing 
more. 

15.  In Levittown, Pennsylvania, 65 per cent of the women interviewed 
had  wanted more  evening visitors  at  home,  but only  20  per cent 
reported more  "than  they  were  used  to."  Even  so,  So  per centre-
ported having visitors  and going  to visit  at least  once  a  week.  Ja-
hoda  et  al.,  pp.  112-113. 

. 

16.  In the random sample, 75  per cent of former city residents and 38 
per cent of former  suburbanites reported more  neighboring,  and 
24  per cent of the  latter,  less,  but two  thirds of  former  suburban 
apartment dwellers and 84  per cent of urban ones did more neigh-
boring in Levittown. 

17.  All  in all,  41  per cent of the  Philadelphians preferred old  friends 
to Levittowners;  27  per cent preferred the opposite. (The rest were 
undecided or said  both.)  Among mixed-marriage  partners,  67  per 
cent chose old friends  and the rest could not decide.  On the other 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  297  • 

hand,  among  former  Philadelphians  who  had  become  organiza-
tion  members,  31  per cent  chose  Levittowners,  as  compared  to  g 
per cent of nonmembers. 

18.  Similar  friendliness  is  reported  in  a  new  high-rise  apartment  de-
velopment in  downtown Detroit by  Wolf and  Ravitz.  Increase in 
visiting  was  also  found  among  people  moving  into a  new  urban 
public housing  project.  Wilner et al.,  Chap.  12. 

19.  For an  earlier finding  on the role  of predispositions in  suburban 

sociability, see  Fava. 

20.  A  study of Dagenham,  an  English  new  town  now  forty  years  old, 
found  that  the  longest  residents  reported  their streets  the  friend-
liest.  Willmott  (1963),  p.  Gg.  In  an  American  homogeneous  com· 
munity,  long  residence  expanded  the  circle  of  acquaintances, 
rather than increasing the intensity of association. See Caplow and 
Foreman. Pierson's data  from  Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  indicated 
a  decrease  in  neighboring over  time,  however,  for  67  per cent  of 
people living  there  two  to  three  years  were  doing more  neighbor-
ing than in the former residence,  but only  15  per cent with six  to 
seven  years  in  Levittown  were  doing  more;  62  per  cent  of  the 
latter  reported  less  neighboring  than  when  they  first  moved  in. 
The data cannot tell, however, whether the decrease resulted from 
the  aging of  the  community or increasing  incompatibility due  to 
turnover of residents. 

u.  In the random sample,  78 per cent of the previously active and 77 
per cent of  the  inactive were more involved  in Levittown;  in  the 
city  sample,  the  percentages  were  41  per  cent  and  50  per  cent, 
respectively. 

22.  People  were  asked  whether  they  had  "intended  to  join  that  or-
ganization or one like it  before you  moved out to Levittown." 
23.  Another  14  per cent  were  women  who  joined  because  their  hus-
bands were  already  active;  a  similar number joined  because  they 
were asked by  the children. 

24.  In a working class suburb in California,  17  per cent reported join-
ing more organizations  than  where  they  lived  before,  20  per cent 
fewer.  Seventy  per cent belonged  to  none  at all,  however.  Berger 
(1g6o),  p. 59· Slum dwellers moving  to a  new  public housing pro-
ject  reported  a  slight  increase  in  organizational  attendance,  but 
hardly more  than  the  control group moving  to  old housing.  Wil-
ner et al.,  p.  191. 

25.  Only  31  per  cent  were  members  at  the  first  interview,  but  two 
thirds of the rest said  they planned to join an organization in  the 
future, and most later did so.  In Levittown,  Pennsylvania, Pierson 
found that membership increased with length of residence;  46  per 
cent of  those  living  there  three  years  or  less  were  members,  but 
76  per cent of  those living there six  or seven  years. 

26.  In a  new working class  suburb,  27  per cent reported more church 

attendance,  24  per cent less.  Berger (1g6o),  p.  45· 

27.  Thirty-three per cent of them now went  to church less  often,  and 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

only 7 per cent more often.  Among  former  tenants,  on  the other 
hand,  41  per  cent  attended  more,  and only  4  per  cent  less.  One 
reason  for  reduced  attendance  is  the  loss  of parental  baby-sitters. 
The other group which  reduced  its attendance  most  were  profes-
sionals,  29  per  cent  reporting  a  decrease  as  compared  to  9  per 
cent  of  white  collar workers  and  14  per cent  of blue collar ones. 
28.  Among Catholics in the Philadelphia sample,  14  per cent attended 
more  often,  10  per cent  less.  Among  the  Protestants,  42  per cent 
attended more,  8  per cent  less.  Among  the Jews,  67  per  cent  at-
tended  more,  17  per cent  less.  In  the  suburb  studied  by  Berger, 
fundamentalist  Baptists were  the  only group  to go  to  church  sig-
nificantly  more  often  after  the  move.  Berger  (1960),  p.  48. 
29.  Even  so,  only  8  per  cent  of  the  Jewish  synagogue  members  at-

tended regularly. 

30.  The  random  sample  intermarried group  reported  a  13  per  cent 
increase;  the  Philadelphia  sample,  no  increase  but  a  30  per cent 
decrease. 

31.  In the Philadelphia sample, two thirds of former apartment-dwell-
ing  Protestants  went  to  church  more,  as  compared  to  a  third  of 
those  coming from  row  houses  or detached ones.  For the  random 
sample,  the percentages were 54  and  14. 

32.  Forty  per  cent  of  those  increasing  their  church  attendance  also 
reported more couple visiting,  but none of those who decreased it 
or  did  not  change  it  altered  their  visiting.  For  neighboring,  the 
percentages were 6o  and 26  per cent respectively.  Among random 
sample Protestants, differences were negligible. Unfortunately, the 
data  cannot identify the causally  prior factor. 
33·  Catholics did  not make  a  single  friend  at church. 
34·  The random sample was asked about shifts in party allegiance be-
tween  the  first  and  second  Levittown  elections,  when  a  likeable 
Republican  amateur  defeated  a  veteran  Democratic  professional 
politician. Sixteen per cent had shifted parties,  10  per cent of pre-
vious  Republicans  but  fully  44  per  cent  of  previous  Democrats. 
There  were  no  background  differences  between  changers  and 
stable voters,  and many of the shifts were probably temporary,  for 
the Republican lost decisively in  the following  election. 

35·  Similar party stability has been reported for Levittown, New York, 
by  Wattel,  p.  299;  in  other American  suburbs,  by  Berger  (196o), 
p. 3;  Lazerwitz; Wallace; and in an English new town,  by Willmott 
(1963),  p.  105.  See  also  Banfield  and Wilson,  pp.  16-17. 

36.  In  a  newly  suburban  working  class  population,  29  per cent  said 
their interest in politics increased after they became home owners. 
Berger (196o),  p.  36. 

37·  Fifty-nine  per cent  of  the  women  and 50  per cent of  the  men  re-
ported  less  spare  time;  4  per  cent  and  17  per  cent  reported  no 
change.  Respondents were  also  asked  to  answer  the  question  for 
their  spouses.  Whereas  the  women  judged  changes  in  their  hus-
bands'  spare  time  correctly,  the  men  overestimated  the  decrease 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  299  • 

and underestimated the increase in spare time reported by women. 
Evidently they thought Levittown had been harder on the women 
than  was  actually  the  case. 

118.  Of  those  reporting  activity  changes,  41  per  cent  also  have  more 
spare time, and 511  per cent less;  among those reporting no activity 
change,  only  23 ·per cent  now  have  more  time  and  62  per  cent 
have less. 

39·  For the  random sample as  a  whole,  Levittown's  impact on spare-
time  change is  less,  64  per cent of  the  reasons  given  being unre-
lated,  20 per cent related to the  house,  and  16  per cent related  to 
the community. For activity change, only 7 per cent are unrelated, 
however;  50  per cent are  house-related  and  411  per cent  are  com-
munity-related. 

40.  As regards  time change,  the impact of moving to  the suburbs and 
to  a  house  is  about  the  same  for  former  urbanites,  although  for-
mer suburban single-family  home  occupants naturally  report  less 
time change than anyone else. 

41.  Among  these  with  more  spare  time,  37  per  cent  are  less  bored 
now  than  they  were  in  the  former  residence.  Among  those  with 
fewer spare hours, 12  per cent are more bored, 56 per cent less. 
42.  In the California working class suburb, 29 per cent reported drink-
ing less, and 4 per cent more, but otherwise there was little change 
in leisure styles.  Berger  (196o),  p.  79· 

43·  Percentages are from both samples combined to obtain a  sufficient 
number of  respondents.  The  styles  were  named  by  the  respond-
ents,  and  "modern"  refers  to  what  professional  designers  call 
"Moderne"  or "Hollywood  Modern."  The  designers'  conception 
of mode·rn was described as  "Danish Modern" by one  respondent. 
44·  Some people derived  their inspiration from  Levitt's model houses, 
but since these were furnished in a wide array of styles,  the builder 
gave  them no single clue for  furnishing his houses. 

45·  A  study  of Levittown,  New  York,  suggests  individual  taste  as  the 

prime determinant. Wattel, p.  297. 

46.  The first  time, 72  per cent liked it "very much,"  23  per cent "quite 
a  bit,"  and  5  per cent "don't care  one way  or the  other."  By  the 
second interview,  the  percentages were  61,  32,  and  7 respectively. 
The Philadelphians  were  less  satisfied,  36  per cent  liking  it  very 
much, 42  per cent quite a bit, and 22  per cent ambivalent. In both 
samples,  low-status  people  tended  to  be  most  dissatisfied.  The 
question  was  very  general,  came  early  in  the  interview,  and  re-
quired respondents  to choose  between  fixed  categories,  so  the  fig-
ures  themselves  probably  mean  little.  Despite  the  unwillingness 
to  dislike  Levittown,  people  did  not  hesitate  to  answer  the  next 
question:  "Is  there  anything  you  don't  like  so  well  about  Levit-
town?" 

47·  In the random sample, complaints about lot size came from former 

suburbanites,  but the Philadelphians mentioned  them  too. 

48.  In the first  interview,  73  per cent expected  to stay,  19  per cent to 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

move,  and  8  per  cent  were  undecided.  In  the  second,  everyone 
had  made  up  his  mind,  74  per  cent  to  stay  and  26  per  cent  to 
leave. The initially uncertain were too few  to be analyzed. Propor-
tionately,  more  of  the  initially  decided  changed  their  mind  in 
favor  of  staying,  for  of  intended  Settlers,  only  13  per  cent  now 
want  to  move,  and of Mobiles,  half now  expect  to  stay. 

49·  Since  the  Philadelphians  were  interviewed  only  once,  these  data 
come from respondents who had filled  out mail questionnaires be-
fore  arrival,  and may  be an unrepresentative fraction  of the total 
sample. 

50.  Seventy-three  per  cent of  the  California  working  class  suburban-
ites  planned  to settle,  21  per cent  to  move.  Berger  (1g6o),  p.  109. 
51.  Altogether, young women,  the college-educated,  high school drop-
outs,  blue  collar workers,  Italian  and  Jewish  women,  Irish  men, 
first and second generation Americans, and partners in mixed mar· 
riages  miss  the  city  most  often.  Education  was  the  determining 
factor;  except among  Italians and other Southern  Europeans,  the 
better  educated  missed  the  city  more  than  the  poorly  educated; 
even  among  the  Jews,  who  missed  it  more  than  other  ethnic 
groups,  the  better-educated  outnumbered  the  others.  The longer 
people  have  lived  in  the  city,  the  more  they  are  likely  to  miss  it, 
except again for  the Italians. The latter also miss the city only for 
people  they  know  there;  all  other groups did so  even if they  were 
not lonely for  relatives  and  old  friends. 

52.  Fifty-six  per  cent  of  all  women  mentioned  missing  downtown 
shopping, some adding  cultural facilities  as  well.  Sixteen per cent 
missed  the  old  neighborhood  or  corner  stores;  another  16  per 
cent, their families. The men gave no dominant reasons, but shop-
ping was mentioned alone or in conjunction with other things  by 
6o  per cent,  and 37  per cent mentioned relatives. 

53·  Seventy  per  cent  who  missed  the  neighborhood  also  missed  the 
city,  but 32  per cent who did not miss  the city  were lonely for  the 
neighborhood. Some  people missed  the city but not the neighbor· 
hood;  they were primarily short-term residents, well-educated peo-
ple,  Jews,  mixed-marriage  partners,  and  ethnic  group  members 
who lacked  their own  neighborhood  (for  example,  Albanians). 
54·  Judging  by  their  responses,  they  did  not  miss  the  row  house  as 
such, but were using  the question to complain about high heating 
bills  in Levittown. 

55·  Thus, 75  per cent of those not completing high school, 70  per cent 
of  those  who  had  attended  college,  but  only  41  per cent  of  high 
school  graduates  chose  the  city.  Women  who  had  formerly  lived 
with  their parents and would have  preferred  the  city  if they  had 
been childless seem  to imply that conflicts about how to raise  the 
children  must  have  caused  considerable  trouble  in  the  three· 
generation home. 

56.  Levittowners who  missed  the  city  wanted  to  move  back  without 

children, but those who missed  people there did not. 

The  Impact  of  the  Community 

•  301  • 

57·  Sixty-five  per  cent  of  the  sample offered  suggestions,  and  women 
did so more than mep. It should be remembered that the interview 
took  place  before  department  stores  and  a  movie  theater  were 
built in the Levittown shopping center.  Another reason  given  by 
women for  wanting to live in  the city was job opportunities. 
58.  Thirty-seven  per -cent  of  the  former  urbanites  dislike  Levittown, 
and  the  same  proportion  of  former  suburbanites  do.  Among 
tenth· and  twelfth-graders,  49  per  cent  of  former  urbanites  and 
39  per  cent  of  non-urbanites  complain  about  having  nothing 
to do. 

59·  The  description  was  as  follows:  "Now,  I  want  you  to  imagine  a 
row house,  not  the kind built in Philadelphia, but a  modern one, 
with a  3o-foot front,  and with the same  amount of space,  the same 
layout, and same general design  as  your Levitt house.  It would be 
just like your present house,  except  that it would be a  row house. 
It would be built in rows of four on streets just like those in Levit-
town,  and in a community just like  Levittown in  all  other ways." 
The  questions  were:  "A.  Suppose  you  had  a  choice  between 
your present house and this modern suburban row house,  but the 
row  house  was  only  15  minutes  from  the  husband's  work;  which 
would you choose?"  "B.  ... (If)  the  row  house was  only  15  min-
utes  away  from  the  stores  and  other  facilities  of downtown  Phil· 
adelphia,  which  would  you  choose?"  "C.  Now  supposing  both 
were  located in Levittown.  If the  row  house  cost  $10oo  less  than 
your  present  house,  which  would  you  choose?"  "Ca. 
.  .  .  how 
about if  the  row  house cost  $2000  less  than your present house?" 
"Cb.  How  much  less  would  the  row  house  have  to  cost  before 
you  would  think seriously  about it?" 

6o.  Five  per cent would  take  the row house  for  $10oo  less,  9  per cent 
more  for  $2ooo  less.  Another 4  per cent  agreed for  half the  price 
of  the  Levitt  house. 

61.  Despite  my  attempt  to  describe  a  superior row  house  model,  the 
respondents were reacting to  the row houses  they had known.  For 
this  reason,  the  Philadelphians,  many  of  whom  had  come  from 
row  houses,  were  not even  asked  this  question. 

62.  For some  hopeful  trends  in  row  house  design,  see  Whyte  (1964). 
6g.  Berger (1g6o),  Chap.  1. 
64.  Berger (1g6o),  p.  93· 
65.  Wilner et al.,  Chap.  13. 
66.  Willmott (1g6g), computed from Table 8, and pp. 44-47. 
67.  Zelan's study also  showed  that students raised in the suburbs were 
more  likely  than  urban  ones  to  prefer  suburban  residence  once 
they had married. 

68.  I  do  so  for  stylistic  reasons,  but  also  because  I  see  no  major  dif-
ference  between  the  two.  A  planner  is  a  type  of  policy-maker, 
sometimes but not always concerned with long-range change,  and 
a  city  planner  is  a  policy-maker  who  works  inside  community 
boundaries.  When  I  describe  or  criticize  current  city  planning 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

practice,  however,  I  shall  refer  explicitly  to  the  city  planner. 

6g.  The mere act of moving may also  be a  source of change. 
70.  These effects  of a  new  dwelling  unit and  its  greater spaciousness 
were  also  the  most  significant  changes  reported  by  a  sample  of 
slum  dwellers moving into a  new public housing project. Wilner 
et al.,  Chap.  10. 

71.  Stability is not, however, intrinsic to home ownership; Transients 
may not feel  it, and tenants may feel  it as much as  owners if they 
expect to live in the apartment and neighborhood for a  long time 
-for example, the West Enders I  studied and  Manhattanites. 
72.  An  exception  is  the  wading  pool,  where  mothers  talk  to  others 

while watching their small children. 

73·  The minority  churches  tended  to  attract  people  from  the neigh-
borhood  in  which  they  were  ~ocated,  and  insofar  as  they  made 
friends at church, were thus limited to their own neighborhood. 
74·  The size  of living rooms  and  the cost of entertaining also  play  a 

limiting role. 

75·  Even  so,  there  were  class  differences.  For  example,  only  21  per 
cent of the  purchasers of the cheapest house had graduated from 
college, as compared to 30 per cent of those in the medium-priced 
one and 48  per cent in the most expensive. 

76.  It was  infinitesimal,  for  example, when compared to what Young 
and Willmott (Chap.  10)  found  in a  new  English  housing estate, 
where almost the entire population sat and suffered in individual 
loneliness  for  several  years,  unable  to  break  the  ice  even  with 
next-door neighbors. 

77·  In most American cities,  the new downtown high-rise apartments 
attract  a  disproportionate  number  of Jews.  Abu-Lughod,  p.  4o6 
and Fenmore. Fenmore reports on his unpublished study of a sam-
ple of suburban home owners near Philadelphia who,  for  various 
reasons,  might  be  prospective  residents  of  downtown  apartment 
buildings. He writes:  "The significant finding of the study is  that 
almost  all  of  the  suburban  non-Jews  . . .  wished  to  remain  in 
their single-family  homes,  whereas  the overwhelming majority of 
Jews either wished to or were actually planning to move into new 
urban high-rise apartments." 

78.  A  more detailed  treatment of these  points can be  found  in Gans 

(tg62b). 

DDDDDD 
DDDDDD 

Part 3  • THE  DEMOCRACY 
OF  POLITICS 

DDDDDD 

Chapter  Twelve 

POLITICAL  COMMUNICATION 

D 

D 

D 

D 

IN  PART  ONE  OF  THIS  BOOK  I  CONCLUDED  THAT  THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE 
community was determined more by  the events which  took place 
after its founding than by prior planning, and more by the people 
than  by  their  leaders.  In  Part  Two  I  suggested  that  people's 
lives  were  also  shaped  by  what happened  in  Levittown,  particu-
larly  by  the  other  people  they  encountered.  These  conclusions 
lead  logically  to  a  related  question:  To what  extent do  govern-
ment  and  politics  reflect  the  goals  and  priorities  of  the  people, 
and to  what extent those  of the tlecision-makers,  the  elected  and 
appointed  officials,  party  leaders,  and  influential  interests  who 
affect  and  make decisions  in  the name of  the  people?  This then 
raises  the  question  of  whether  or not government should  be  re-
sponsive to the people and, if so,  how much. 

THE  STRUCTURE  OF POLmCAL  COMMUNICATION 

At  one  level  these  questions  are  about  political  communication 
between  decision-makers  and  citizens;  the  responsiveness  of  the 
former  to  the  latter  and  the  feedback  from  the  latter  to  the 
former.  In  a  democratic  community  the  functioning  of  the 
decision-makers  is  affected  by  two  obvious  facts  of  life:  that  the 
voters  have  a  life-and-death  power  over  government  through 
their periodic visits  to the ballot box; and that between elections, 
they take only a  minor role  in government,  so  that their feelip.gs 
about  its  decisions  are  unknown  and  unpredictable.  Even  so, 
government must be responsive  to  the citizenry;  the  people who 

•  305  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

run  for  office  want  to  be  elected,  and  the  political  party  can 
flourish  only  if  its  candidates  win.  The  candidates  themselves 
want  to be responsive  too,  at least in Levittown, where being an 
elected  official  is  a  part-time  job.  As  a  result  they  are and  wish 
to remain  amateur  politicians,  running  for  office  not  simply  to 
further  political  careers  but for  personal  goals  (like  bathing  in 
the public spotlight) and for social  ones (to do what they  think is 
best for  the community).  Being amateurs,  they believe that doing 
good  is  largely  a  matter  of  having  the  right  intentions--which 
they  usually  feel  they  have.  Indeed,  much  campaign  disagree-
ment  is  a  result  of  differences  among  equally  well-intentioned 
people over just what is best. 

Once  elected,  however,  the  candidates'  behavior  changes  con-
siderably.  Now they are part of a  political system which can make 
decisions only by minimizing response to and feedback from citi-
zens and by not raising (or taking stands on) issues.  Only by keep-
ing public disagreement to a  minimum can  it function as  a  bro-
ker and synthesizer between conflicting interest groups and voter 
blocs. 1  In  other  words,  candidates  become  what  Levittowners--
like  most  Americans  in  other  communities-deprecatingly  call 
"politicians."  The reasons  for  thi-s  change  are  quite  simple.  Be-
tween elections,  the government gets little feedback,  for the aver-
age  citizen neither communicates with  the government nor is  in-
terested  in  the  government's  communicating  with  him.  All  de-
cision-makers  in  Levittown,  whether  elected  or  appointed, 
whether  in  municipal  government,  the  school  system,  or  any 
other  public agency,  invariably  reported  that  only  a  handful  of 
citizens  ever  approached  them  to  discuss  their  decisions  or  to 
make  requests.  Meetings  of  elected  bodies  are  poorly  attended, 
and even public hearings usually draw badly, except when a fight 
is  in the offing.  As a  result,  the elected official gets feedback from 
only a  few  people:  those  personally and directly affected  by gov-
ernment  decisions,  especially  those  deprived-and  therefore  an-
gered-by current and proposed actions. 

The lack of citizen communication and attendance is  not a  re-
sult of apathy but of two other factors.  First,  most governmental 
activities simply do not touch  the  everyday lives and concerns of 
the citizenry.  Most Township Committee decisions dealt with in-
ternal matters, of interest only to it and its staff, with meeting the 
requirements of county and state governments,  and with  satisfy-
ing  requests  for  approvals  and  licenses  from  the  builder  and 

Political  Communication 

•  307  • 

businessmen.  School  board agenda were similarly removed from 
parental concerns with the school. In addition, many people were 
hesitant  to  communicate  with  elected  officials.  Whether  they 
come  from  large  cities  or small  towns,  people  know  that  politi-
cians  are  not  often  receptive  to  criticism,  that  they  will  usually 
respond  in  vague  generalities,  and  that  only  rarely  can  they  be 
really helpful with individual requests. 

The  politicians'  reluctance  to  pay attention  to  the citizenry is 
not  caused  by  disdain  or  lack  of  interest,  however,  but  by  the 
very  sparseness  of  citizen  communication  and  participation.  If 
most  people do not participate most of the time,  and if  the com-
munity  is  at  all  heterogeneous  (and  most  communities  are), 
those  citizens  who  do  contact  the  decision-makers  will  have 
different and often conflicting interests, and will make contradic-
tory  demands,  some  for  one decision,  others  for  a  diametrically 
opposed one.2  This conflict  places  the  decision-makers  in  a  diffi-
cult and nearly impossible  position,  for  they can make  only one 
decision.  Consequently,  whatever  they  say  and  do  will  alienate 
someone, and their wisest course is  to listen as little (or at least as 
impassively)  as  possible,  and  to  say  and  do  even  less.3  Since  the. 
angry citizen  is  more  likely  to remember his grudges at election 
time than the happy one his satisfaction, it is to the politicians' ad-
vantage  to  be noncommittal.  But they are also faced  with uncer-
tainty;  they cannot help displease some citizens,  yet without ade-
quate feedback they rarely know how many and who will remem-
ber till  the next election.  But their problem is  much closer than 
even the next election. If they  talk publicly and freely  about the 
decisions  they must make and what they are thinking, they open 
themselves to immediate attack from  whichever side feels  its case 
is being given short shrift and from the opposition party, which is 
always  looking for disgruntled citizens and campaign issues.  And 
if  they  exposed  themselves  to  continual  feedback,  each  side 
would bombard them with demands and arguments and no deci-
sion could ever be reached. 

Communication  is  also  inhibited by what might be called  the 
norm of altruistic democracy.  According to this norm, a keystone 
of popular democratic theory, citizens enter government to serve 
their fellows and the public interest. They are expected to be im-
partial, altruistic servants of the citizenry, sure of how the public 
interest  is  to  be  defined,  who  make  morally  proper  decisions 
without concern  for  interest groups,  for  voter  blocs,  or for  their 

•  soB  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

own  and  their party's political  future.  Since act.ual  decisions can 
rarely  avoid  such  considerations,  however,  practicing  altruistic 
democracy  would  not  enable  decision-makers  to  perform  their 
duties.  Yet  if the actual decision-making process were  made  pub-
lic,  the  decision-makers  would  immediately  be  attacked  as  im-
moral, self-seeking, and "political." With the opposition  party al-
ways lying in wait for a campaign issue, the decision-makers' only 
solution  is  to  hide  the actual  process  from  both  their opponents 
and the public. 

The  deviation  between  the  normative  and  actual  decision-
making process would not become a campaign issue,  of course, if 
the  citizens did  not embrace  altruism  in  government.  Although 
they may sense  that the theory does not work, many are neverthe-
less  hopeful  that  when  the  incumbent rascals  are  turned  out at 
the next election, things will  be different.  Indeed, voters are sen-
sitive  to  personalities  rather  than  issues  because,  in  addition  to 
lacking  interest  in  most  issues,  they  are  looking  for  a  candidate 
they can  trust  to  act  according  to  the  normative  model.  Experi-
enced  politicians  cater  to  this  in  their  campaigning,  trying  to 
prove  that  the  opposition  candidate  is  self-seeking whereas  their 
own is altruistic. The voters'  ability to "believe" and  to  be suspi-
cious at the same  time  is  deeply  imbedded  in  the  country's cul-
tural  heritage.  Americans are convinced that  the normative con-
ception  of democracy is  viable,  and  that it  is  not put  into opera-
tion  because  of  the  corruptibility of the  politician.  At  the  same 
time,  however,  they  also  identify  their  own  point  of  view-and 
their  own  interests--as  altruistic,  the  opposition  as  selfish,  and 
the  politician as  a  hero or a  villain depending on which side  his 
decision falls. 

Ultimately,  this conception  of the political  process stems from 
people's lack of involvement in government.  If they participated 
in its activities,  they would soon realize how  the decision-making 
process works and why so.  They might not give  up their faith  in 
altruism,  but they would somehow adjust their thinking to allow 
them to be able to function in government, just as  they do in or-
der to  function  in  the  midst  of office  and  factory  politics on  the 
job.  Moreover,  in a community like Levittown most officials  and 
party workers are not professional  politicians, and so  share the at-
titudes of the ordinary citizen.• They may  understand the neces-
sity of "politics"  in their own  agency  or party,  but  they  explain 

Political  Communication 

the  actions  of  the  opposition  as  a  violation  of altruistic  democ-
racy.11 

The selective participation of citizens in government and their 
belief that it ought  to  be run  by altruistic norms  forces  the gov-
ernment  to  protect  itself  from  its  constituents.  The  individual 
decision-maker  restricts  feedback  and  response,  but  this  is  not 
sufficient,  for  if a  politician suddenly decided to seek  greater  po-
litical  support by  becoming more  responsive  to  his  constituents, 
his  colleagues  would  have  to  follow  suit, and as  soon  as  conflict-
ing demands were evoked,  the decision-making process would be 
back in the same impasse. 

Consequently,  government  must  develop  institutional  means 
to shield itself from  the citizens.  In Levittown  (and  I  suspect ev-
erywhere  else)  it  does  so  by  creating  two  governments,  a  per-
forming and an actual  one.  The government with which  the de-
cision-makers  confront  the  citizens  is  a  performing government; 
its  actions  are  performances  that  follow  altruistic  democratic 
theory. 6  The stage,  designed  according to  this  theory and  legiti-
mated  by  state  and  local  statutes,  is  the  public  meeting  of  the 
governing  body,  where  decision-makers  listen  to  citizens'  opin-
ions  and  then  appear  to  vote  on a  final  decision  on  the  basis  of 
what they have heard.  But this  is  only a  performance, for  the de-
cision  has  already  been made "backstage,"  in the secret delibera-
tions  of  the  actual  government. 7  In  Levittown,  its  major  com-
ponents are the caucus and the political party. 

The caucus  is  a  private  arena  where  decision-makers  can  de-
bate and agree on the decisions which  they then announce at the 
public  performance.  The political  party provides  the  individual 
decision-maker  with  the  support  he  needs  to  function  in  both 
performing  and  actual  governments.  The  elected  government, 
open  to public inspection and liable to  turnover with every elec-
tion, is socially and psychologically an extremely unstable base of 
operations. The individual decision-maker, like any other human 
being,  needs  an  institution in which  he  plays  a  permanent role, 
can  make a  career,  can  be rewarded  and  promoted  for  successes 
(but  be  retained  if  he  should  fail  temporarily),  and-most  im-
portant-where he can associate with people he can trust. Even in 
the government caucus, he can never be totally open with his col-
leagues,  some of whom may represent  present or future  political 
opposition. 

•  310  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

The party aids him in yet another crucial way. If he is to be re-
elected,  his  decisions  must  reflect,  at  least  to  some  extent,  the 
wishes  of  his  constituents.  Since  he  is  restricted  in determining 
these  wishes,  the  party  provides  a  service  to  him  by  gathering 
feedback  about  citizens'  ideas  and  feelings  through  its  party 
workers.  More  important,  it  offers  him  another,  simpler,  crite-
rion for decision-making-the welfare of the party. Since its wel-
fare  is,  like  his  own,  based  on  its  ability  to  win  elections,  the 
party becomes a responsible partner in the decision-making proc-
ess.  Indeed,  often  the  elected  official  is  only  a  representative-
sometimes  even  an  errand  boy-who carries  the  decision  of the 
party  leadership  or caucus  back  to  the  government  caucus. 

The constituents who have  definite  opinions on  the decisions 
government should make or who demand  government action  in 
.their behalf are, ()f course, excluded from  both caucuses. Even so, 
they must attempt to get around the performing government and 
reach  the  actual  one,  or  rather,  to  communicate  with  the  per-
fonning politician  in such a  way  that their message  will  be con-
sidered by the actual government. Those who represent powerful 
interest groups and voter blocs have easy access to the actual gov-
ernment,  but the  powerless  groups  have  considerable  difficulty 
and  must  devise  techniques  that compel  the  actual  goveFnment 
to pay attention. Such groups can put on their own performance, 
stating  their  viewpoint  in  public  so  that  the  decision-makers 
must acknowledge it, or they can bring a  large number of citizens 
to the public meeting,  putting on a  show of strength to persuade 
the decision-makers to take them into account. If they know that 
they are  not reaching the  actual  government,  they can  put on a 
counterperformance.  They may  get  up at  a  public  hearing and 
ask  the  decision-makers  a  series  of  questions  to  which  they  al-
ready  know  the  answers,  hoping  that  the  counterperfonnance 
will gain them sympathy from other constituents and thus add to 
their  strength.  They  may  also  try  to  make  the  decision-makers 
look . foolish  or  contradict  themselves,  aiming  to  show  that  the 
whole operation is  a  performance and  that the real decisions are 
made elsewhere. This too is  intended to gain outside support, es-
pecially  from  among  those  who  believe  in  altruistic  democracy. 
Finally, they may try to force  the decision-makers into a  perform-
ance break, generating so much pressure that the latter lose  their 
poise,  depart from  the previously agreed-on  decision,  and  prom-
ise  publicly  to  support  the  protesters.  They  are  now  not  only 

Political  Communication 

•  811  • 

committed  t~ a  position  they  must  take  in  the  actual  govern-
ment,  but they  have  also  revealed  the  performance  and  thereby 
ended it temporarily.  Protesting citizens continually seek  to cre-
ate  enough  disagreement  and  conflict  to  end  the  performance 
and  force  the  actual  government  to  reveal  itself;  the  decision-
makers  try  to  prevent conflict  so  that  they  can  maintain  the  se-
crecy of the actual government and preserve  their freedom from 
pressure. 

Most  people,  including  even  the  decision-makers  themselves, 
are not entirely aware of the existence of performing and actual 
governments.8  Nevertheless  they  sense  it,  for  they  know  that 
politicians "talk out of both sides of their mouths," promise one 
thing and do another,  and cannot be  trusted. Although  their de-
scriptions  are  couched  in moral  terms,  they are  referring  to  the 
deviation  between  the  politician's  performing  and  actual  roles. 
Of course, performances are usually considered deceitful, and the 
term  itself  is  derogatory,  but  I  do  not  use  it  in  this  sense.  It 
should be clear that I consider the performance a real and intrinsic 
part of American politics, and although by no means desirable, it 
is  probably  impossible  to  eliminate  except  through  a  radical 
(and  quite  unlikely)  change  in  the  citizen-government  relation-
ship. In any case,  I  do not mean my observations to be read as  an 
expose  of  the  "immorality"  of  American  governments,  local, 
state, or federal, for politics is too complex to be judged by norms 
of personal or familial relationships. 

The Functions of the  Performing Govemment 

A  primary  function  of  the  performance  is  reducing  uncer-
tainty.  When  everything  rides  on  the  next  election,  every  de-
cision-indeed,  every  act  of  government--am  result  in  unpre-
dictable  consequences.  In  a  suburban  community,  where  many 
voters are  independents,  neither  party  can count  on a  sufficient 
number of loyal  adherents who will  support it regardless  of the 
candidates or the issues,  and  there are too few  patronage jobs  to 
provide workers  and assured votes.  In a  new community,  uncer-
tainty is even greater, for no one knows the voters well enough to 
predict  how  they  will  vote,  and  strangers  may  get  up at  public 
meetings  and  throw  them  into an  uproar.  Also,  when  organiza-
tions are hurrying to establish  themselves,  normative democracy, 
which  posits  open  discussion,  means  inevitable  delays.  If  just 
enough democracy can be incorporated to mollify those who feel 

•  312  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

it is  as  important as getting things done, then  the actual  practice 
of democracy can be avoided. Whether the group is new or estab-
lished,  the  expression  of democratic  dissent  is  evidence  of con-
flict,  and  this  is  often  interpreted  as  a  sign  of organizational  in-
effectiveness.  A  proper  performance,  on  the  other  hand,  creates 
an  image  of efficiency  and skill.  Consequently,  government  tries 
to exclude uncertainty and open conflict from  the political  proc-
ess  wherever it can, and to plan and "stage" all  its activities. 

Particular care  is  taken  in  the  staging  of confrontations  with 
citizens.  Open meetings of public bodies are run with an agenda, 
which  functions  much  like  a  script.  In  fact,  when  the  school 
board  was  still  composed  of  old  residents,  the  superintendent 
prepared a virtual script, enabling the board members to read all 
their remarks off  the agenda, except for  their votes.  The mainte-
nance  of  the  performance  is  enhanced  by  local  and  state  ordi-
nances,  and by Robert's  Rules of Order,  which  make  it difficult 
for  the audience to question  the decision-makers.  In New Jersey, 
the  local  governing  body  is  not  even  legally  obligated  to  hear 
citizens at its regular meetings,  but  Levittown's Township Com-
mittee  allowed  them  to  speak.  Its counsel  acted as  a  gatekeeper, 
however,  using  the  laws  governing  public  meetings  to  cut  off 
comments that might erupt into argument and endanger the per-
formance. 

The main opportunity for people to offer feedback  is  the pub-
lic  hearing,  but  it  too  is  set  up  as  a  performance.  Citizens  can 
make  speeches  and  offer  testimony,  but questioning of the  deci-
sion-makers  is  discouraged.  The latter sit on the podium and lis-
ten  (or  appear  to  listen),  absorbing  testimony  without  any  re-
sponse,  so  as  not  to  indicate  how  they  are  going  to  vote.  Dur-
ing  my  study,  the  public  bodies  had  decided  how  to  vote  be-
fore  the  public  hearing,  and simply sat  through  it as  a  legal  re-
quirement. Not that they rejected all comments, but usually they 
had heard them before, and the chance of learning anything new 
was small. Yet even if new facts or ideas were presented, and offi-
cials  were  influenced  by what  they  heard,  they  tried to  mask  it. 
The incentives for  maintaining this  performance become visi-
ble during the rare occurrences of performance breaks. When the 
ordinance  to  admit  nonresident  doctors  was  in  public  hearing, 
the opponents were  putting intense  pressure  on  the  elected  offi-
cials  to  table  it.  Stung  by  their  angry  remarks,  one  official  sud-
denly announced that he was reversing his position and would go 

Political  Communication 

•  313  • 

back  on  the  caucus  agreement  to  approve  it,  made  before  the 
public hearing. Having neither political ambition nor a firm base 
in  his  party,  he  was  less  insulated  from  pressure  than  his  col-
leagues,  who  tried  to restore  the  performance  by keeping silent. 
His  defection  and  continued  audience  pressure  eventually  also 
forced  them  to  reverse  themselves,  however.  Although  the  per-
formance  break achieved  the  opponents'  demands,  it only  made 
them  angrier,  because  they realized  the  public  hearing had  been 
"cut and dried." The supporters of the ordinance were angry too, 
demanding equal  time at a  later meeting.  New political negotia-
tions  ensued  to  reduce  the  conflict  and  to  construct  a  compro-
mise,  and  later  the  performance  breaker  and  his  colleagues  de-
nied  that  they  had given  in  to  pressure,  their denial  illustrating 
once  more  how  much  trouble  the  break  had  caused  them.9  An-
other  performance  break  took  place  at  a  school  board  meeting, 
when  a  large  number of parents arrived  unexpectedly  to  protest 
the  actions  of  a  teacher.  The  board  members  pointed  out  that 
they  had  not  been  briefed,  meaning  that  without  a  caucus  they 
were  unable  to  prepare  a  performance  demonstrating  that  the 
board had the situation under control and would take the appro-
priate  actions.  The  parents  insisted  on  an  immediate  answer, 
however,  and  the  board  members  had  to  call  on  the  superin-
tendent to make a  statement. This was  a  significant performance 
break  because  it  violated  the  traditional  performance  in  which 
the  school  board  announced  all  policy  decisions  (implying 
thereby  that  it  also  made  them)  and  the  superintendent  spoke 
only when asked for facts and technical detail. 

Experienced  politicians  can  perform  without  letting  on,  but 
nonprofessionals  are  less  expert  and  less  detached.  They  need 
the voters'  approval  more, and are more likely to give  in  to pres-
sure. Seeing themselves as working hard for little financial  or psy-
chological  reward  (few  voters  ever  praise  them),  they  are  espe-
cially sensitive  to  criticism,  and  the  more  strictly  they adhere  to 
the  performance,  the  less  their  chance  of  being  criticized.  One 
elected official  explained  the  necessity  for  the  caucus  as  follows: 
"People  on  the  board  wouldn't  speak  freely  at  public  meetings. 
They serve on a courtesy basis,  and they wouldn't take  that kind 
of punishment,  the  newspaper and  other attacks  that  would  fol-
low if they spoke freely."  Nonprofessionals fear unrehearsed con-
frontations  of  all  kinds.  They  are  apprehensive  about  making 
speeches,  but  these  can  be  written  out and  rehearsed,  and  since 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

people  suspect  overly glib  speakers,  a  poor style  is  not  a  serious 
liability.  Answering  questions  afterwards  is  another  matter.  Ei-
ther uncertainty or evasion  can make  the politician  look  foolish, 
and  if  he  tries  to  answer  openly  he  may  be  trapped  into a  per-
formance break. Professionals, on the other hand, are more adept 
at  maintaining  the  performance,  although  they  need  it  less  psy-
chologically,  being less  threatened  by criticism  and  hostile  ques-
tions. 

A  performance is  most necessary if the actions to be taken pub-
licly  violate  the  democratic  norm.  When  leaders  of  the  two  op-
posing  Republican  party  factions  met  to  make  peace,  new  ap-
pointments to  the party club and executive committee had to be 
arranged,  and an  hour of the meeting was  spent  in planning the 
"deal"  so  that  it  would  not  look like  one  to rank-and-file  mem-
bers.  If important men suddenly resigned  from  party or govern-
ment  posts,  performances  had  to  explain  their  departure.  The 
official  reasons were  usually  "new business duties  which  prevent 
giving sufficient  time  to  the  community,"  to  maintain  the  myth 
that politicians never squabbled or forced out dissidents.  The in-
dividuals concerned could have  told the real  reasons,  but only at 
the cost of losing their remaining party support and ending their 
political careers.  So  could  the groups which  had dismissed  them, 
but only at great political risk;  if the truth had come out, the op-
posing  faction  (or  the  other  party)  could  have  staged  counter-
performances  to  show  that  party  bickering signified  the  leader-
ship's  incompetence.  Although  many Levittowners suspected the 
public explanations for dismissal,  the safest course was  to hold to 
them.  ,Maintaining  the  performance  might  increase  voter  dis-
trust,  but this  was  less  dangerous  than  giving opponents  the  op-
portunity  to  put  on  counterperformances.  And  once  a  false  rea-
son is  given, it can be reiterated ad infinitum until even the most 
skeptical lose interest in questioning it. 

Performances  are  not  restricted  to  small-town  local  govern-
ment;  they are staged by state and national politicians,  including 
Presidents  of  the  United  States,  and  by  executives  of  large  na-
tional corporations as well. A  fascinating example took place dur-
ing  the  1964  Republican  convention,  when  Governor  Scranton 
was  forced 
into  a  per(ormance  break  that  lost  him  what 
little  support  he  had  left  for  the  nomination.  After  criticizing 
Senator  Goldwater  as  impulsive,  he  sent  him  a  letter  attacking 
his  stand  on  several  issues,  using  stronger  language  than  cus-

Political  Communication 

•  315  • 

tomary among  party colleagues.  When  this  departure  from  nor-
mal  performance was  criticized,  Scranton explained  that the  let-
ter  had  been  written  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  apowing  the 
Goldwater forces  to describe  him as  impulsive. To I]1ake  matters 
worse,  he  then indicated  that an aide  had drafted  the letter,  and 
that he had signed it without reading it, enabling his  enemies to 
speculate  whether  he  had  ever  written  anything  attributed  to 
him,  and more  important, whether he  ever read what he signed. 
Inevitably, a  Goldwater supporter wondered publicly if Scranton 
would read  the  laws  and  policy  documents  he  had  to  sign  if  he 
became President, putting an end to Scranton's performance por-
traying himself as  an  effective  and  unemotional  decision-maker. 
Of  course,  the  Goldwater  group's  reactions  were  performances 
too;  every politician uses ghost-writers and signs his  name to un-
read documents,  but he maintains the public trust by not admit-
ting  that  either  happens. 10  Once  there  is  a  breach  in  perform-
ance,  trust  quickly  evaporates,  because  people  wonder  whether 
the politician can  take  the  proper actions in a  crisis-including, 
among other things,  maintenance of the necessary  performances. 
The  performance  is  only  one  method  of restricting  feedback, 
and many others are used by decision-makers  in confronting citi-
zens.  For example, if an angry citizen suggests that a decision was 
based on morally doubtful reasons,  they will supply reasons quite 
in keeping with  altruistic democracy.  Unless  the citizen has  ade-
quate information  on  their  real  reasons  (and  he rarely does),  he 
cannot  continue  the  discussion.  If he  appears  frequently,  and 
consistently  questions  actions  and  reasons,  the  decision-makers 
can charge him with being a crank or a "radical," and if he comes 
regularly to voice dissent, his fellow citizens may agree with them. 
If a  large  group  of  citizens  appears  in  opposition,  the  decision-
makers  can  restrict  feedback  by  pointing  out  that  they  were 
elected  to  use  their  own  best  judgment  to  make  decisions  and 
that they will  not be blackmailed into reaching a  decision on the 
basis  of  "pressure,"  a  performance statement  that  is  made  to re-
duce  pressure,  precisely  because  decisions  are  affected  by  it.  To 
discourage  petitioners,  they suggest  the  threat to  the social  order 
that follows  from  "government by petition." Again,  the response 
is  a  performance,  for  if the  petitioning group is  large  and angry 
enough,  its  demands may be taken into consideration even while 
its right to petition is questioned. 

Motivations also count; an individual who voices disagreement 

•  316  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

because of ideological concern and has no personal interest in the 
matter is  likely to be ignored. This is  ironic, because government 
is  supposed  to  be  run  on  an  alrruistic  basis,  but  it  is  also  prag-
matic;  the  decision-makers  know  that  people  without  personal 
stakes  are  not  likely  to  be  interested  very long,  and  their  com-
ments can be rejected. 11  They will also ignore feedback if they be-
lieve  it  is  "political,"  a  performance  staged  by  the  opposition 
party to give  it an  issue  for a  future campaign.  Finally,  the most 
frequent device is  to dismiss all public feedback unless the person 
can  provide  a  legitimate  reason  for  offering  it.  Because  so  few 
people volunteer feedback in public, decision-makers believe that 
those who do only get up "to hear themselves talk"-and the sub-
stance of their remarks can be set aside. 

Of course,  the  decision-makers  do  not reject  all  feedback,  for 
they  must  be  able  to  judge  the  electorate's  m9od  between  elec-
tions.  They  prefer,  however,  to  gather  their  own,  and  to  do  so 
privately, away from  the public arena where it can upset the per-
formance.  This also  enables them  to structure the questions they 
ask  their constituents,  to get specific  reactions  to  the alternatives 
open  to  them  on  crucial  decisions.  More  general  feedback  from 
rank-and-file  citizens  is  collected  mainly  by  the  parties'  district 
representatives.  The  party  leaders  concentrate  on  the  organiza-
tionally  active,  making  sure  that  a  high  party  member  partici-
pates in every major civic and service club. Decision-makers often 
stay late  in  public meetings  to listen  to  people who  want  to  talk 
to  them  and  invite  calls  at  home  or  in  the  office,  thus  screening 
out all  but those concerned enough to stay behind at the end of a 
meeting or to take the trouble of calling. 

But the  major means of discovering what  the  public  is  think-
ing is  by a kind of clinical empathy which produces "anticipatory 
feedback."  As  part  of  his  professional  training,  the  politician 
learns how to understand his constituents-what they want, what 
angers them, and how intensely they feel about issues.  Some  poli-
ticians  have  "empathic  personalities."  By  nature  they  are  mar-
ginal  people,  detached  from  close  ties  (which  makes  them  good 
observers)  and  able  performers,  who  can  draw  people  out  and 
sense  how  their minds  work.  Nevertheless,  most  politicians have 
to learn such skills. They spend most of their waking hours meet-
ing  with  people,  and  thus  gather  a  great  deal  of  information 
about them.  They have  also  learned  to  be  tough-minded,  to  see 
their constituents as  defenders of  their various self-interests,  and 

Political  Communication 

•  317  • 

to  screen  out  the  rhetoric  with  which  voters  confront  them. 
Moreover,  successful  politicians  usually~but  not  always-
resemble  their constituents and can  sometimes  use  their own re-
actions  to  an  issue  to  judge how  the  voters feel. 

The  Functions  of the  Actual Government 

The workings of the actual government are hard to fathom,  for 
the caucus meets in total privacy, no minutes are kept, and no out-
siders  are  permitted.  The press cannot attend,  and  I  was  refused 
admission  even  though  I  promised  not  to  publish  anything  on 
what  took  place.  Its  functions  can,  however,  be described  by  its 
origin. When the township was rural, there was no need to divide 
government into performing and actual branches. Since everyone 
knew  everyone  else,  feedback  could  be  anticipated  and  did  not 
have  to  be  solicited  or restricted.  The only  performance was  to 
satisfy  the  statutory  requirement  of  "the  record,"  but  in  a  one-
party community the decision-makers did not require protection 
against  the  voters.  No  caucus  was  needed;  when  disagreements 
arose,  township  officials  could  talk  them  over  informally  and 
make  the  necessary  compromises.  After  Levitt  had  purchased 
land  for  the new community,  the volume of decisions  increased. 
Differences of opinion developed,  and decisions  became raw  ma-
terial for  pro- and anti-Letitt factions embroiled in primary elec-
tion contests.  Additional  people had to be hired, and their quali-
fications  could  not be  discussed  openly without hurting feelings 
or creating grudges that might become campaign issues. The new 
decisions  also  generated controversy,  and as  one old resident ex-
plained,  "People were  in  the audience  who  liked  to  hear  them-
selves  think.  They  kept  interrupting  and  this  made  for  long 
meetings and nothing got done." As a result, the Township Com-
mittee  decided  to  hold  what  it  called  "conference  meetings." 
"We  work  out  our  disagreements  at  the  conference  meetings," 
another  Committee  member  pointed  out.  "We  don't  wash  our 
dirty  linen  in  public."  The  caucus  was  continued  when  the 
Levittowners took over the township government. 

The  importance  of  the  caucus  was  illustrated  in  1961,  when 
the  Township  Committee  consisted  of  two  Republicans  and  a 
Democrat.  The  latter,  realizing  that  he  was  a  losing  minority, 
decided  to  make  political  capital  from  it.  One day  he  suddenly 
announced  the  existence  of  the  caucus  and  his  "resignation" 
from  this  secret  and  therefore  undemocratic  body.  Although  he 

• 

[318 

• 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

departed  in  well-publicized  indignation,  he  returned  quietly  a 
few  weeks  later.  Given the widespread lack of interest in govern-
mental  activities  at  the  time,  no  public  outcry  followed  his  ex-
pose, and his absence only kept him out of the actual government. 
The Board of  Education  delayed  instituting  the caucus  until  its 
factions  disagreed  so  much  that  it had  no  other choice.  A  year 
later,  when control  of  the  board  was  taken  over  by  two  cosmo-
politans from  the  Citizens Association  for  Public  Schools,  it was 
dropped  as  undemocratic,  but  with  many  controversial  matters 
on  the agenda  so  much  time was  spent on debate  that few  deci-
sions were made. When community leaders began to say  that the 
board was unable to make up its mind and that its members were 
acrimonious,  the  caucus  was  restored.  Backstage,  disagreement 
was  reduced,  for without an audience, minority factions  and po-
litically  ambitious  board  members  could  not  put  on  a  show  of 
intransigence  to  impress  their  supporters.  Arguments  did  not 
end, however, even at public meetings, for the board was  too split 
on some issues  to maintain a  harmonious  performance. 

The  party  plays  many  roles  in  the  actual  government.  Party 
caucuses  precede  governmental  ones  and constantly  remind  the 
decision-makers  that  their  individual  decisions  must  be  woven 
into a  pattern that can  be used in election campaigns  to remind 
the forgetful  voter and  provide him with  an  image of the  party. 
The  party  workers  act  as  brokers  between  the  party  and  the 
voters between elections, doing favors  and providing an entree to 
the actual government for  individuals with personal requests. Al-
though  modern  political  science  theory  has  it  that  the  service-
giving functions of the political  party are unnecessary  in  middle 
class  communities,  this  is  not  entirely  true.  The  district  leader 
tells  citizens  which  agencies  of  government  can  help him;  he  is 
available in  the everting when government offices are closed, and 
can even  offer  to  process a  request when the citizen  cannot  take 
time off from  work  to go  to city hall.  If a  citizen is  in  trouble, a 
kind  word  with  the  police  or  the  judge  cannot  hurt,  even  if  it 
cannot  help  very  much.  And  when  unemployment  strikes,  the 
politician may be able to come  up with a  temporary government 
job  or  a  business  contact  who  is  looking  for  workers.  Since 
elections are sometimes won by a  small margin,  the goodwill  cul-
tivated  by  the district  leader  may  be decisive.12 

Party workers  also  function  as  a  micro-electorate,  as  stand-ins 
to test issues and candidates. If a candidate does not go over with 

Political  Communication 

•  319  • 

the  party workers,  he  is  unlikely  to attract  the voters,  and  if he 
wins  the workers'  favor,  they  will  try  harder  to get him  elected. 
Workers  make  good  candidates,  because  of  their  party  loyalty. 
Since  a  candidate,  once  elected,  is  formally  free  to arrive  at  his 
own  decision,  the  party can advise and cajole,  but it cannot dic-
tate  his actions.  If the official  is  a  loyal  party man,  however,  the 
party can be sure of some influence in the workings of the actual 
government. 

But the party's main function is campaigning. In a community 
of  independents,  every  vote  is  unpredictable  and  campaigning 
never ceases. The formal election campaigns are of course crucial, 
for while they are performances, they decide the fate of the actual 
government. The party needs a  good performer, a candidate who 
acts  like  a  winner  to  enthuse  the  workers  and  who  can  attract 
loyal  and  independent  voters.  The  voters,  particularly  the  un-
committed,  look  for  candidates whom  they can  trust as  persons, 
and who would do  the right thing for  them  in case  they became 
interested in an issue or had to request a favor. 

Voter  demands  result  in  a  campaign  which  concentrates  on 
personalities  and  party  images.  Personal  qualities  are  hard  to 
stage,  so that a  candidate must come across  as  stable, moral, hon-
est, and trustworthy. For this reason, any hint of personal scandal 
is  enough  to  exclude  a  polential  nominee.  Divorce,  especially 
among women, is construed as a sign of instability and is a  handi-
cap  even  with  non-Catholic  voters.  So  is  a  sexually  attractive 
woman  candidate.  Other women  will  oppose  her  for  fear  their 
husbands will  vote  for  her sexual  charm;  men,  for  fear  that she 
will use her attractiveness politically and throw government into 
an  uproar.  Dedication  to  altruistic  democracy  and  the  commu-
nity's welfare is  a  must, and a  previous history of service in com-
munity organizations and in church is required as evidence. The 
candidate who dwells  on  the community's  troubles  may  be con-
sidered  overly  pessimistic;  the  voters  seem  to  want  an  optimist 
who feels  problems are solvable.  In a community like Levittown, 
the candidate must be a  family man, with somewhat more school-
ing  than  the  voters  but not  too  much  more. 13  Candidates show 
off their families,  and  the campaign literature provides  informa-
tion about their education and occupation, allowing the voters to 
judge if they are in similar circumstances, and therefore likely to 
understand  them and act on  their behalf.  For example, a  house-
wife with a large brood of children and a  blue collar worker hus-

•  320  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

band  needed  few  speet::hes  to  persuade  the voters  that she  would 
vote to keep taxes low. Speeches are only words and promises, but 
personal  characteristics  are  undeniable  evidence.14  The  school 
board candidacy of a very popular but childless  Levittowner was 
questioned,  the  feeling  being  that without children of  his  own, 
he  might  not  represent  parents  properly.  This  set  of  criteria 
tends  to  select young,  lower middle class  people,  and encourages 
salesmen-but not high-pressure ones-to run for office.15 

Much  of  the  campaigning  is  devoted  to  presenting  the candi-
dates  as  people,  wherever  possible  through  direct  and  informal 
confrontations  with  the  voters.  The  rest  consists  of  an  endless 
stream  of  press  releases  proclaiming  the  moral  virtues  of  one 
party and its opposition's corruption. Party public relations men, 
hired  for  the  duration  of the campaign,  spend  their time  taking 
apart  the  opposition's  every  move  and  every  statement  to  find 
charges. As a result, the campaign becomes a constantly escalating 
morality play,  with  each  party attacking the other for  acts which 
both  would carry out without a  second  thought  if  they were  po· 
litically desirable and  if  the  party were  protected  by  the  privacy 
of  the  actual  government.  For  example,  in  the  fall  of  1959,  the 
Democrats  attacked  the  Republican  incumbent  for  "running a 
political  employment  agency"  by  appointing  relatives  and 
friends  to  township  posts,  then  a  standard  procedure  among the 
old resident elite. The Republican target described the charge as 
"tragically  humorous"  and  "stupid,"  pointing  out  that  the 
Township Committee, rather  than he personally, appointed peo-
ple,  and  that in any case,  no new residents were available for ap-
pointments.  The  Democrats  promptly called  his  statement  "tra-
gically  unfunny,"  accused  the  Republicans  of  only  appointing 
other  Republicans,  and  charged  that  unqualified  local  people 
were being named to jobs for which experienced outsiders should 
be  found. 16  At  this  point,  the  Republican  declared  that  "he 
would  engage  in  no  more  political  infighting,"  and  that  "these 
assaults  have  been  directed  at  me  for  purely  political  reasons." 
He described himself as  being "township administrator" and said 
he  had  "neither the  time nor  the  inclination to engage  in  politi-
cal  rr,  .. dslinging."  Then a  Republican candidate for  minor office 
took over the attack, accusing the Democrats of operating a polit-
ical  machine  and  waging  a  "smear  campaign,"  and  called  on 
them  to  "stick  to  issues  and  cease  resorting  to  personalities." 
"We," he continued, "are running on a  sound platform of prog-

Political  Communication 

•  321  • 

ress  for  the  best  interests  of  the  community."  The  Democratic 
leader promptly responded by calling the smear "ridiculous." He 
added,  "If  that  were  the  best  that  the  Republican  candidates 
could offer in the way of press releases,  then their campaign must 
be  pretty  barren  of  intelligent  thinking."  He  pointed  out  that 
lacking patronage jobs the Democrats could not possibly build a 
machine,  and  then  repeated  the  political  employment  agency 
criticism, arguing that it was  "a charge we  supported with facts." 
He  concluded  by  pointing  out  that  the  Democrats  had  offered 
constructive  recommendations,  whereas  the  Republicans  said 
''that Levittown  is  a  nice  town,  but not a  word about what  they 
propose  to  do  to  keep  it  that  way."  The  Republicans  then  an· 
nounced  a  ten-point  program  to  "continue  the  best  features  of 
past and  present  programming." 17 

These  exch~nges are  ritual  performances,  not  expected  to  be 
read by  the mass  of voters and put on in the vain  hope that they 
may persuade a  few  naive ones. 18  They serve  no significant func-
tion except to offer constant evidence of the existence of the  per-
forming  government  (and  to  uphold  the  norms  of  altruistic  de-
mocracy),  but they are  perpetuated because  they take  little effort 
and  might just sway  the  small  number  that constitutes  the  mar-
gin  of  victory.  The  absence  of  evidence  on  the  progress  of  the 
campaign forces  both parties to  use every  possible  technique and 
opportunity to change the voters'  minds, and once one party sets 
off a  volley of charges,  the  ~her must retaliate,  for  silence could 
be an admission  of guilt and would  be  so  interpreted in the  op-
position's next press release. 

The  entire  process  is  less  a  conspiracy  by  the  parties  to  put 
over  their candidates  than an attempt, however fumbling,  to an-
ticipate  the demands  of  the  electorate.  The only  point at which 
the parties refuse  to respond to  these demands is  in taking stands 
on  major  issues.  Taking stands  is  divisive  and can  lose  as  many 
votes  as  it gains,  and  the  parties do not even force  each  other to 
do  so,  for  that  tactic  would  only  boomerang;  the  challenging 
party would  also  have  to  take a  stand.  Instead,  both limit  them-
selves  to  generalities,  noncontroversial  issues  like  civil  service, 
and those controversial ones which are already identified with the 
party  position  and  image.  On  the  rare  occasions  when  many 
voters are, however,  interested in an issue,  they pressure  the can-
didates  and  parties  to  take  a  stand.  For  example,  at  one  candi-
dates'  night  for  the  school  board  election,  the  hopefuls  were 

•  322  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

asked  whether  or  not  they  would  vote  for  the  school  budget. 
Those  without  further  interest  in  public  office  answered  freely, 
but  one  politically  ambitious  man  explained  candidly  that  he 
had not yet decided,  for  either a  yes  or no would lose  him votes. 
The  audience rejected  his answer  and  made  him  promise  to  an-
nounce  a  decision  publicly,  which  he  did  after  days  of  feverish 
conferences with his advisers. 

The  election  is  the  point  of  maximum  communication,  feed-
back, and response, and once it is  won or lost,  these end abruptly. 
But even then, feedback is limited. People can only vote for  a can-
didate,  and  unless  he runs  on  one  specific  issue,  the  meaning of 
the  vote  remains  uncl~ar. If the  party  in  power  is  turned  out, 
people  are  obviously  discontented,  but  no  one  knows-or  can 
prove-the  specific  gripes,  who  shares  them  and  how  intensely. 
Unless  there is  a  single  overriding issue  of deep and widespread 
concern,  the  electorate has  not been able  to  tell  the  government 
what decisions it wants,  if any;  it has only chosen decision-~akers 
who  resemble  it  in a  variety  of  personal characteristics and who 
have  promised  to  do  their  best  for  it  and  the  commu"nity.  The 
diffuseness of the feedback is  of course advantageous for  the new 
officeholders;  it frees  them  to fupction  in  the actual  government 
and to adapt their decisions with an eye  to the next election. 

THE  ROLE  OF  THE  PRESS 

Political communication is  not restricted to government and ..:iti-
zens alone;  the  press also  plays a  role. 19  In theory,  it is  independ-
ent  of  government  and  politics,  but  in  practice  it  is  not,  even 
contributing to feedback  restriction somewhat by its  tendency to 
report  the  activities  of  the  performing  government.  Ironically, 
the  reporters  are  interested  in  just  the  opposite;  their  profes-
sional norms,  their prestige, and their feeling of accomplishment 
are nurtured by debunking performances and by describing what 
happened  backstage,  although  they  too  believe  in  altruistic  de-
mocracy, and their reportage of the actual government often em-
phasizes  its deviation from  democratic norms.  This is  the essence 
of the expose.  But the journalist and  his  newspaper are  also  part 
of the  political  institution.  Publishers and editors are sometimes 
party  or  government  decision-makers  and  often  influential  be-
hind  the  scenes. 20  Even  when  this  is  not  the  case,  the  reporter 

Political  Communication 

becomes  involved  in a  relationship with  his  news  sources  which 
ultimately forces  him to cover the performing rather than the ac-
tual government. 

The  decision-makers  want  no  news  spread  about  the  actual 
government, and if a reporter crosses  them, he incurs their hostil-
ity  (or  at  least  loses  their  confidence)  and  may  be  punished  by 
not  being given  good  stories  in  the  future.  Yet  if  the  reporter 
limits his  coverage  to  the decisions and the performances that ac-
company  them,  his  story  will  be  dull  and  uninteresting.  He  is 
thus caught in the middle. If he alienates the decision-makers,  he 
loses  the  only  reliable  source  of  news  about  the  actual  govern-
ment;  if he goes along with them, he will displease his editor and 
his readers.  His only escape hatch is the decision-maker's need for 
him.  If the  decision-maker  punishes  a  reporter  by  withholding 
information,  the  reporter  can  retaliate  by  not  publishing some-
thing the decision-maker wants to get into the paper. 

These conflicts of interest lead to the development of a  system 
of  mutual  obligation  between  reporter  and  decision-maker, 
which  incorporates  the  former  into  the  political  institution  by 
inviting  him  backstage,  but  with  the requirement  that  he  limit 
his  coverage  of  the  actual  government.  The  reporter  learns  all 
(or  almost  all),  but cannot  tell;  the  decision-maker  tells  all  (or 
as  much  as  he  has  to),  but  knows  he  will  not  learn  about  it  in 
next  morning's  paper.  The relationship  is  perhaps  less  a  system 
than  a  tug  of  war,  for  the  decision-maker  is  always  trying  to  re-
veal  as  little as  possible,  and  the reporter attempts  to  publish as 
much as he can without alienating his source.21 

The tug of war begins as soon as  the reporter is  put on the city 
hall  beat.  At  first,  he  gets  only stereotyped  interviews,  but as  he 
hangs around city hall  he picks up bits of unauthorized informa-
tion,  gossip  and rumors,  and gradually begins  to learn about the 
actual  government.  At  this  point,  the  decision-makers  let  him 
step behind the scenes  to tell him what is  happening in the actual 
government, usually warning that it is  not to be published. If he 
does not reveal  off-the-record information (which can be checked 
quickly if his  paper comes out daily or weekly),  he  is  likely to be 
taken  further  into  their  confidence,  and  for  good  reason.  If the 
reporter were not told everything, he might find out anyway, and 
from  hostile sources.  The decision-maker who shares confidences 
can at least be sure that the reporter gets his version of the event. 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

The  reporter  benefits  by  understanding  the  political  scene, 
which helps him make sense of it to his readers even  if  he cannot 
publish all he knows. 

Sometimes  he  can  report  beyond  the  performance,  by obtain-
ing bits of information from  friendly decision-makers he can use 
without  attribution,  or  by  finding  one  who  has  private  reasons 
for  letting himself be quoted.  He can also  speculate,  incorporat-
ing material  that  may  be  far  more  than speculation  among city 
hall  insiders.  His mere presence occasionally makes  it impossible 
to  keep  backstage  information secret;  city hall  insiders  may  talk 
so much about political dissension that rumors about it appear in 
the community, and then  the reporter is  not only free  to cover it 
but  is  almost  forced  to,  in  order  to  show  that  the  press  is  not 
holding back information. When a story is  big,  the reporter may 
risk angering his  sources,  particularly if he knows  they will  need 
him  in  the  future.  He can  also  plead  the  norms of  his  craft,  for 
politicians  know  that  professional  reporters  will  reject  any  de-
mand  for  overt  censorship  or  self-censorship.  Or  he  can  argue 
that competing reporters may publish the story and he cannot let 
them scoop him. 

Even  if  the  reporter writes  an article  the  decision-maker  does 
not like,  the latter cannot criticize too much, for if the reporter is 
angered he may dig deeper, get back at the decision-maker by  re-
vealing confidences,  or obtain damaging material  from  his oppo-
nents. Since  the decision-makers are the most avid readers of city 
hall  news,  a  skillful  newsman can  include such  material  between 
the  lines  without  actually  reporting  it,  thus giving the decision-
maker a signal  to get back on good terms with the reporter before 
he  resorts  to  more  open  coverage.  Of  course,  decision-makers 
have  ways  of  keeping the reporter  in  line,  too. 22  They can  criti-
cize  his  articles  and  shame  him  into  more  friendly  stories,  they 
can  forget  to  invite  him  to  an  important meeting or feed  scoops 
to a competitor, and if necessary  they can complain to the editor 
or publisher, although this will surely cause the reporter to retal-
iate.  They can also  wine and dine him or even  try  to establish a 
social  relationship,  but  the  experienced  reporter  knows  how  to 
avoid these traps. 

The mutual obligation system was nicely illustrated during the 
1g6o  election  campaign  when  the  Levittown  Civic  Association 
sought  to  hold  a  local  version  of  the  Great  Debates.  Local  re-
porters were asked  to question  the  Levittown candidates,  but all 

Political  Communication 

refused.  The dean of the local  press corps explained:  "The ques-
tions  I  really  want  to ask  I  can't ask  in  public,  only  in  private, 
but if I  ask  innocuous questions,  my reputation as  a  newspaper-
man  is  impugned."  Eventually  two  Philadelphia  reporters  who 
covered  Levittown  as  "stringers" and were  not  involved  enough 
in local  affairs  to become part of the system  of obligation agreed 
to serve. 

Over time,  the reporter becomes a  part of the political  institu-
tion,  if only  marginally,  and  his  coverage  begins  to  be selective, 
sometimes deliberately but more often unconsciously.  Getting to 
know  his  major  news  sources  well,  he  forms  likes  and  dislikes 
which cannot help but influence his reporting.  For example, one 
local  reporter  told  me:  "I  would  never  publish  anything  nasty 
.  If he  makes  a  mistake,  either a  political  or a 
about C 
moral  one,  I  tell  him  to  watch  out,  but  I  don't  put  it  in  the 
paper." The reporter also begins to identify with the community, 
omitting uncomplimentary items, and helping people and causes 
he thinks deserve  publicity.21  For instance,  one editor gave extra 
space  to  a  Levittown  organization  and  kept  out stories  of  its  in-
ternal conflicts, because it provided a  worthy community service. 
He  also  proposed  community  programs  he  considered  desirable 
or  necessary,  writing  editorials  about  them  and  creating  news 
stories by feeding his ideas to a community leader and then inter-
viewing him.  In addition  to helping the community, such cover-
age  aided  the  newspaper's  reputation  for  community  service, 
which  in  turn  mi~ht attract  more  advertisers  and  readers.  And 
when news was scarce-an almost constant problem in Levittown 
-planting ideas helped fill  up the pages. 

Of  course,  reporters  also  expressed  personal  prejudices.  One, 
believing  that  elected  officials  deserved  respect,  described  their 
critics  as  rabble-rousers,  thus  supporting  the  governmental  per-
formance  and  preventing  the community from  knowing  the  ex-
tent of dissatisfaction.  He covered  Levittown  only  a  short  time, 
and  was  also  atypical,  for  most  reporters  enjoyed  watching  the 
decision-makers  squirm  under  questioning  and  were  especially 
pleased  to report evasive answers  to critics by those who had also 
evaded  their  questions.  Another  reporter,  also  temporarily  in 
Levittown, remained outside the system of obligation altogether, 
leaving him free  to slant the news  in favor of the Democrats and 
his own point of view on the school budget. 

It must be noted that most of the  time the reporter's coverage 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

is  routine  and does  not  involve  the conflict  with  sources  I  have 
described.  His  everyday work  is  to cover the community and  its 
myriad  events,  and  he  is  not expected  to delve deeply  into  gov-
ernment.  In  a  small  community,  many  decisions  of  the  actual 
government  have  obvious  or  publishable  explanations,  and 
events  that  strain  the  system  of mutual  obligation  are  rare. 

Yet  even  if  that  system  did  not  exist,  coverage  of  the  actual 
government would  still  be difficult.  For one  thing,  reporters are 
not admitted to  caucuses and  must get their  information  second 
and  third  hand.  Accurate  explanations  for  decisions  are hard  to 
come by, for even when a  political event is  not secret it is difficult 
and  time-consuming  to  reconstruct  what  really  happened  and 
why,  requiring  interviews  with  many  people  to  dig out  reasons 
and motivations.  Few  newspapers  have  large enough  staffs  to  do 
such  legwork,  and  in a  small  community  too  many  other events 
must be covered.  The average reporter often  looks  in on several 
governmental  and  organizational  meetings  during  the  same 
night,  even  if  they  provide  little news,  in order  to maintain  his 
rapport with the people in charge. Since politicians and organiza-
tional leaders are quick to object to poor or insufficient coverage, 
the reporter spends much  of his  time on  inconsequential  stories 
which respond  to a  demand from  his most loyal  readers.  Finally, 
few  newspapermen  have  the  training  to  analyze  an  event  or  to 
understand the social  forces  and processes  that lead to a  political 
decision. 

Ideally, in order to give people the kind of information needed 
to  participate  effectively  in  government,  it  (but  particularly  the 
actual  government)  should  be  covered  as  a  serial,  in  which  the 
day-to-day  reportage  is  part  of  an  integrated  analysis.  Over  the 
long run,  the coverage  should show-at least  for  major  issueS-
what  alternatives  were  open  to  decision-makers;  why  these; 
which ones  they chose  when  they had a  choice;  and what  social, 
economic,  and  political  incentives  and  pressures  brought  about 
the choice. This kind of reportage would require a staff of skilled 
and  dispassionate  political  scientists  who  would  not  make  snap 
judgments  about  deviations  from  democratic  norms.  The avail-
able reporters are neither social  scientists nor trained sufficiently 
in  the  social  sciences,  however.  Experienced  hands  know  the 
principles of political strategy,  but even  they rarely focus  on  the 
social  system  and  on  the  processes  which  encourage  or  re-
quire these strategies.  Reporters are,  like their readers,  believers 

Political  Communication 

•  327  • 

in altruistic democracy, which is  one reason why decision-makers 
try  to  keep  them  from  reporting  the activities  of the actual  gov-
ernment.  Of course,  they  are more sophisticated and niore skep-
tical  than  their  readers  and  rarely  cast  politicians  as  heroes  or 
villains  as  quickly  or  as  permanently  as  citizens  do.  Moreover, 
they  are  trained  to· be  objective,  so  that  their  evaluations  are 
often implicit-and generally unconsciously so.  Even so, reporters 
have  political  positions  like  anyone  else,  and  a  close  reading  of 
their  articles  (which  is  carried  out  only  by  the  politicians  they 
cover)  would  reveal  these  positions.  However,  the  value  judg-
ments reporters make are more often based on their personal and 
professional  relationship with  the  politicians  they cover than on 
political  ideology;  they  tend  to  favor  the  cooperative  politician 
and  to  write  negatively  about  the  one  who  makes  their  work 
more difficult. 

But  more  sophisticated  coverage  of  the  actual  government  is 
also  held back by lack of incentives for doing so.  Protests by poli-
ticians may contribute  to  the reporter's pride  that he  has done a 
good  job,  but  they  may  also  get  him  a  warning from  his  editor. 
Professional  rewards for  scrupulous reporting and in-depth anal-
ysis  are rare;  the newspapermen.who work for small-town dailies 
and  weeklies  are  not  read  widely  enough  by  their  professional 
peers  or  in  the  executive  suites  of  top  papers  and  magazines  to 
bring  the  better  job  offers  that  follow  superior  performance  in 
other occupations. 

Still,  the  main  obstacle  to  better  reporting-and  the  main 
withholder of incent1ves--is probably the audience. Many readers 
want  to  know  what  is  happening  in  the  actual  government,  but 
their  interest,  like  their  political  participation,  is  intense  only 
when  a  topic  concerns  them  personally-which  is  why  local  pa-
pers  devote  much  space  to  social  columns.  The rest  of  the  time 
they  are  curious  rather  than  concerned,  reading  the  news  only 
"to keep up with  events."  As  a  result,  Levittown's reporters  and 
editors  received  no  more  feedback  than  the  decision-makers. 
Readers wrote  in  occasionally,  but  as  is  so  often  the  case,  many 
letters came from a few  regular correspondents, some cranks, oth-
ers defined as  cranks simply because they wrote in so persistently. 
For  these  reasons,  letters were  considered a  poor source of  feed-
back.  So  were  circulation  figures,  because  many  papers  are  dis-
tributed  without  charge.  Consequently,  newspapers  know  little 
about their audience and rely on professional  intuition and what 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

they can  pick  up at random  about  its  interest in the news.  Even 
so,  editors  took  audience  interest  into  account,  and  a  matter 
thought  to  be of  minor  interest  would  generally get  little  space 
unless  news  was  in  such  short supply that everything had  to  be 
printed. 

Generally speaking,  an  event was  thought  to  be interesting to 
the readership only if excitement or conflict developed around it. 
For  example,  when  the  builder  persuaded  both  political  parties 
to support a referendum to change the township's name to Levit-
town,  the absence of visible resident opposition led one editor to 
conclude that his readers did not care.  Personally,  he was against 
the  name  change  and  tried  hard  to  find  politicians  who  would 
take a stand against it or give him a quote around which he could 
build a  critical  article.  Unable  to  get  either,  he gave  the  matter 
only routine coverage.  'When  the name  change  was  approved  by 
just a  hundred votes,  he was sorry he had not written about it in 
more detail,  feeling-perhaps justifiably so-that additional  cov-
erage  would  have  produced  the  votes  needed  to  reject  the 
change. 

In  this  instance,  the  editor misjudged  potential  (although  not 
actual)  reader interest,  but normally,  his  paper covered  political 
news in more detail  than Levittowners seemed to want.  And even 
when  they  were  interested,  they  used  the  press  for  other  func-
tions  than  information;  they  also  wanted  a  performance  that 
would give  the outside  world  an  idealized  picture of  Levittown. 
If an  event reflected  negatively on  the community,  many readers 
preferred  to  have  it hushed  up.  For  example,  when  a  teenage 
fight  broke  out,  many  people  wanted  to read  about it,  but were 
also  sorry it had to appear in print.  Likewise, a  neighbor was  un-
happy  about  a  survey  of  Levittown's  racial  attitudes  which  ap-
peared  in  the  Philadelphia  papers  because  she  did  not want  the 
world  to  know  that  many  Levittowners  had  doubts  about  inte-
gration.  Organizational  leade~s are  even  more  insistent  than  or-
dinary residents  that  the  press cover  the performance. Voluntary 
associations  flooded  the  papers  with  publicity releases  written  to 
attract new members and were angered by articles about internal 
strife,  arguing that the papers should be supporting their organi-
zations  instead of  tarnishing their reputations by  playing up dis-
cord.  The demand  for  performance  reporting  even  extended  to' 
noncontroversial  mat·ters.  When  a  photographer  came  to  do  a 
picture  story  on  everyday  activities  in  the  local  pools,  a  school 

Political  Communication 

official  posed  the children in a well-organized swimming and div-
ing  exhibition,  belying  the  near-anarchic  playing  and  splashing 
that normally occurred in a crowded pool too small for much real 
swimming.  Organizational  leaders  and  amateur  politicians  felt 
more compelled to ask  for friendly coverage and were more upset 
by critical reporting than  the  professionals,  who  knew  that  pres-
suring  newsmen  for  printed  praise  would  be  likely  to  boom-
erang. 

The  net  outcome  of  the  reporting  process  is  that  the  public 
does  not get the  kind of news  it would need  if it decided  to  par-
ticipate in government and politics.  Only when an issue  of  wide-
spread concern develops and people  begin  to participate can  the 
reporter spend  the  time  and  energy  to  improve  his  coverage  in 
both  quantity and  quality.  Even  though  he  responds  to,  rather 
than  initiates,  reader  interest,  such coverage  can  have  significant 
impact, providing the already interested with information to par-
ticipate  effectively  and  perhaps  motivating  others  to  join  them. 
When citizen protest becomes sizeable, he can go beyond the gov-
ernmental  performance,  reporting  counterperformances  and 
other  signs  of  the  public's  concern.  He  can  critically  analyze 
official  reports and public statements for  errors or contradictions, 
thus  exposing  the  performance  if  only  by  implication.  He  can 
also  do  surveys  within  the  community  to  reveal  the  extent  of 
citizen  dissatisfaction.  But  even  when  the  reporter's  sympathies 
are with the citizens, he can help them only up to a  point, for  his 
permanent ties  are  w~th his city hall  sources.  When  the  issue  has 
been  resolved  or  public  interest  has  waned,  he  must  face  the 
decision-makers  again,  and  alone.  If the  public  were  interested 
more  often,  he  would  have  more  power  within  the  system  of 
mutual  obligation,  and  the  decision-makers  would  treat  him 
more  respectfully  even  if  he  publicized  the  actual  government. 
This happens to few reporters in few  communities.24 

When reportage diverges  regularly  from  actual  events,  people 
in  the  know  become  skeptical  of  press  competence  and  honesty, 
and  when  the  divergences  become  sizeable,  an  information  vac-
uum develops which  not only  increases skepticism  but generates 
rumors to fill  the vacuum.  It also  encourages  informal communi-
cation systems,  like the community grapevine that serves the resi-
dents,  and  private ones developed  by  decision-makers  to  keep  in 
touch with events outside their own circles.  For instance, a young 
lawyer-politician  developed  an  extensive  personal  information 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

network  by  exchanging  free  legal  advice  to  public  officials  and 
organizations  for  information  he  needed  to  function  politically. 
The reporter's skepticism about the divergence between events 
and  his  coverage  is  even  greater.  The conflict  between his desire 
to write about  the  actual  government and  the  need  to  stress  the 
performance leads  to a  low  opinion of his  sources,  whom  he sees 
as  vain  and  dishonest,  and  of  his  readers,  whom  he  sees  as 
headline-scanners and cranks.  Popular fiction  often describes  the 
reporter as a cynic, and the stereotype has some validity, although 
more often he just becomes discouraged and angTy.  The hostility 
and frustration  he feels  every day  is  expressed openly once a  year 
at press  banquets,  where  reporters  perform skits  which  tell  with 
only  thinly  veiled  animosity  what  they  think  of  the  politicians 
and  the  politics  they cover.  The mutual system  of obligation re-
quires  the  politicians  to  attend  the  banquets  and  to  suffer  the 
attacks in good humor. Once a year, then,  the newspaperman gets 
even with his sources. 

NOTES 

1.  This view of the  political  system  draws on  the concepts and  find· 
ings  of  Meyerson  and  Banfield,  particularly  Chap.  g;  Banfield 
(1955);  Banfield  (1961);  and  Dahl. 

. 

2.  Community  heterogeneity  has  many  political  ramifications.  For 
example, a study of librarians showed those in heterogeneous com-
munities were less likely to buy controversial new books than those 
in homogeneous communities. Fiske,  p.  67. 

3·  Banfield  (1961),  pp.  252-253. 
4·  See  the  discussion  by  Dahl on  the  professional's  monopoly of po-

litical  skills,  particularly  pp.  27g-28o  and  Chap.  27. 

5·  This has some  positive functions.  For one thing, it spurs  the party 
workers on  to greater effort  to  defeat  the opposition. For another, 
it  allows  the  professional  politicians  to  test  issues  to  be  used  in 
the campaign on  the workers before  taking  them into the general 
community. 

6.  The  concept  of  performance,  and  of  other  dramatic  terms  used 
in  this analysis,  are  taken from  Goffman,  especially  Chap.  1.  I  use 
the  term  "performance"  somewhat  more  narrowly,  for  he  defines 
it  as  "all  the  activity  of  a  given  participant  on  a  given  occasion 
which serves to influence in any way any of the other participants" 
(p.  15), whereas I  am  thinking primarily of the attempt to impress 
an  audience  that  decisions  are  made  in  ways  other  than  they 
really  are  made. 

Political  Communication 

•  331  • 

My first  perception of the performance took place at a  township 
meeting  in  which  I  watched  two  lawyers  debating  angrily  with 
each  other over  a  decision,  only  to  greet  each  other  in  the  most 
friendly fashion after the meeting was over. I  am not sure whether 
they "really meant" the anger, but the point is that they impressed 
the  audience  with  the  intense  defense  of  their  views.  Of  course, 
the  change  in  behavior  can  also  be  described  as  a  shift  in  role 
from  political  antagonists  to  professional  colleagues,  just  as  the 
difference  in  performing and  actual  behavior among government 
officials  can  be  described  as  the  differenr.e  between  the  roles  of 
elected  official  and  decision-maker.  Both  concepts  are  valid,  but 
performance is more useful for understanding the relationship be-
tween government and citizen. 

7·  Dahl  distinguishes  between  the  ritual  and  the  reality  of  power, 

8.  The  awareness  of  performances  in  everyday  life  is  discussed  by 

p.  159· 

Coffman,  p.  17. 

9·  The performance was restored in the minutes, which did not men-
tion  the  incident.  The secretary  explained  she  omitted  it so  that 
"when  people  fifty  years  later  read  this,  they  won't  laugh  at us." 
10.  Top  leaders  admit  that  they  use  ghost-writers  to  write  their 
speeches,  but always qualify the admission  by indicating that they 
go  over  the  final  drafts  themselves.  They may  not  actually do  so, 
but  this  maintains  the  performance  that  the  speech  is  their  per-
sonal  product. 

11.  Meyerson  and  Banfield,  pp.  7o-71. 
12.  The leader who wants to rise  in  the party must carry his own dis-
trict,  and  there,  with  the  margin  of  victory  being  even  smaller, 
every favor counts. 

13.  One aspiring candidate was  rejected  because  he had gone  to  Har-
vard  Law  School,  and  in  one  school  board  election  I  analyzed, 
candidates with high school diplomas fared better than those who 
had  gone  to  college. 

14.  When  the  Good  Government  slate  offered  to  serve  without  pay, 
the  voters  concluded  that it was  made  up of high-income  people 
who did not need  the  small salaries  attached  to public office,  and 
so  were unlikely  to share  their financial  worries. 

15.  As  a  result,  upper middle class  Levittowners were continually up-
set about the lack of "qualifications" among the candidates. Look-
ing  for  officeholders  of  their  own  socioeconomic  level,  they  com-
plained  about  the  candidates· low  level  of  education,  absence  of 
professional skills,  poor speaking style,  vagueness on issues,  and of 
course  their  lack  of  interest  in  nonpartisan  good  government, 
long-range  planning,  and  quality  schools. 

16.  A  year later,  the  Democrats  were  charging  that Republicans  pre-

ferred outsiders  to local  people. 

17.  The  quotations  are  from  the  Levittown  Herald,  September  24, 

1959  to  October  15,  1959. 

•  332  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

18.  On "election rituals,"  see  Dahl,  pp.  112-114. 
19.  At  the  time  of  my  study,  Levittown  news  was  published  by  a 
county  daily,  the  Levittown  (now  Burlington  County)  Times;  a 
weekly,  the Levittown Herald;  and by  occasional reportage in  the 
Philadelphia,  Camden,  and  Trenton  papers.  In  1961,  a  weekly 
called Levittown  Life was  founded  by  a  resident  and  his  friends. 
It  supported  C.A.P.S.  an-d  generally  spoke  for  the  upper  middle 
class  point  of  view  until  it  went  bankrupt  in  1963.  It was  then 
purchased by a  local Democratic leader and became a  Democratic 
party  organ  to  counteract  the  Times  and  the  Herald,  both  of 
which  were  usually  Republicah.  The  original  founders  of  Levit· 
town Life bought a weekly in a neighboring town of Beverly  from 
which  they  commented  on  events  in  Levittown.  By  1964,  it  too 
went  under.  So  did  Levittown  Life,  which  was  merged  with  the 
Burlington  County  Times.  Later  that  year,  a  suburban chain  be-
gan  to  publish  the  Willingbot·o  Weekly,  retitled  the  Willingboro 
Suburban  in  1966. 

20.  This  aspect  of  the  relationship  between  politics  and  the  press  is 
discussed  in  Banfield  and  Wilson,  pp.  28-29  and  Chap.  u. 

21.  Gieber and Johnson. 
22.  The  re;rraints  placed  on  journalists  to  maintain  good  relations 
with  their .sources  are  described  in  more  detail  by  Rosten,  pp. 
l07ff. 

23.  Normal  self-censorship  also  takes  place.  Coverage  of  municipal 
court  proceedings  in  Levittown  papers  excluded  domestic  con-
flicts,  because  they  were  considered  private  affairs,  and  sordid 
events were  toned down  for  "family newspapers."  Nervous break· 
downs  which  took  place  in  public  were  reported  as  arguments, 
and  the  case  of  a  man  who  took  his  underage  cousin  to  a  motel 
was  described only as  a  disorderly charge.  The story of a  teacher's 
breakdown in class  was  quashed by  all reporten at the suggestion 
of  the  town's  senior  reporter because  he felt  that both  the  school 
system  and  the  individual  teacher  would  be  hurt  badly,  while 
the newspapers would not gain sufficiently by having published it. 
24.  If it  did  happen,  their  reportorial  performance  would  probably 
be  affected.  Indeed, the only journalists with such political power 
are  columnists  and commentators who do not have  to  gather the 
news  themselves. 

Chapter Thirteen 

THE  DECISION -MAKING 
PROCESS 

D 

D 

D 

D 

JUST  AS  DECISION-MAKERS  CONSTANTLY  SEEK  CERTAINTY  IN  A  PO· 
litical  system  marked  by  uncertainty,  so  they  attempt  to  avoid 
decisions  in  a  governmental  system  which  requires  decisions. 
Government  is  organized  toward  bureaucratic  routine;  it  aims 
to carry out municipal  services entrusted  to it in  such a  way  that 
appointed  officials  will  hold  their posts  and  elected  ones  will  be 
re-elected, and that criticism and conflict are minimized  between 
elections. The ideal is a situation in which precedent can rule and 
no new decisions  are needed. 

But new problems arise  and  decisions  must be made.  Broadly 
speaking,  the  decision-making  process  is  ruled  by  four  criteria. 
First,  government is  normally passive;  it waits  for  issues  to come 
to  its  attention.  In  Levittown,  the  decision-makers  initiated  ac-
tion  only  on  internal governmental  expansion  necessary  for  the 
smooth  functioning  of  the  bureaucratic  apparatus;  on  state  or 
federal  statutory  requirements;  on  issues  which  required  little 
effort, cost, or st.ructural change and resulted in favorable  public-
ity;  on matters which benefitted Levittown as  a whole in the con-
tinuing competition with other communities; and when they had 
no  choice  but  to  act.  For  example,  the  Township  Committee 
initiated a  polio vaccination program without citizens'  asking for 
it,  because  it was  easy  to  do  and  earned  political  goodwill,  and 
the  school  board  raised  school  budgets  because  the  increasing 
number of students left it no other alternative. 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Second,  government avoids or postpones decisions  that cannot 
be resolved  without conflict or  that  expose  the gap between  the 
actual and  the performing government. The Township Commit-
tee  tried  to  bring  ordinances  out  of  the  caucus  to  the  public 
meeting  only  when  unanimity  had  been  achieved.  Third,  gov-
ernment  gravitates  toward  decisions  with  immediate  payoffs, 
avoiding  those  which  produce  mainly  long-run  effects.  Govern-
ment is  reluctant to establish  new  precedents or  set  into  motion 
irreversible  policies  that may restrict its flexibility  in  the future. 
For  this  reason,  if  no  other,  long-range  planning  and  the  for-
mulation  of  permanent  "policy statements"  are  discouraged.  Of 
course government does plan, but principally for goals of its own 
choosing-for example, the staging of performances and the adap-
tation of decisions to future election campaigns. It also sets policy 
(albeit  unwritten)  when  government  agencies  develop  working 
routines.  But  long-range  plans  that  require  higher  current  ex-
penditures to produce a result 5 or 10 years later (for example, to 
forestall  future  school  overcrowding)  are  only  implemented  if 
outside  funds  are  available  or  if  community  pressures  give  the 
decision-makers  no  other  choice.  By  and  large,  however,  plan-
ning and explicit policies are advocated by voters whose demands 
are  being  ignored  in  current  decisions  and  unwritten  policy, 
their  hope  being  that  these  demands  can  be  included  in  long-
range plans. 

Fourth,  the  decision-making  process  is  structured  so  that, 
whenever  possible,  every  elected  official  is  free-or  feels  he  is 
free-to reach  the decision dictated by his  conscience and  by his 
desire to benefit the community. Whether or not he is  ever really 
free  is  debatable,  but the feeling of being so  allows  him to claim 
that he is  not required to pay attention to citizen  pressure,  to in-
clude his own values  in his decision,  and  to  identify  these as  the 
public interest. Feeling free  to vote "according to his conscience" 
allows him to make decisions that will please his reference groups 
and the constituents from whom he gets the most votes. 

The application  of  these  criteria  resulted  in decisions  which: 
(1)  maintained  Levittown's  governmental  bureaucracy  and  mu-
nicipal  services  up  to  voter  expectation;  (2)  aided  the  party  in 
power;  (3)  benefitted  large  or  otherwise  influential  voter  blocs 
and satisfied  interest groups  that were either  in constant contact 
with/ the  government,  could  apply  pressure  on  it,  or  had  cam-

The  Decision-making  Process 

paign  funds  to  contribute  (or  withhold);  (4)  represented  pet 
projects or vested interests of individual decision-makers. 

Obviously,  the decision-makers used  their decisions to improve 
their own and  their  parties'  election  chances.  Although  citizens' 
requests were few,  they carried out those easily satisfied and those 
from  large  or  visible  voter  blocs.  Demands  from  the  Catholic 
leadership group  always  received  attention  because  the  Catholic 
population was  large, and  the Democrats tried  to  satisfy requests 
from  the  Jewish  community  because  it  was  well  organized  and 
therefore assumed  to be  a  cohesive voter  bloc.1  Unorganized res-
idents were similarly favored  if their demands were modest, con-
sidered desirable by the decision-makers, and not likely to arouse 
opposition from more powerful voters or interest groups. 

But most  decisions,  other  than  housekeeping ones,  were  made 
for  the  interest gToups  closest  to government. At  the time of my 
study,  the  most  demanding  one  was  the  Levitt  organization, 
which  needed  frequent  approval  of  its  building  program  and 
made  demands  and  suggestions  on  a  wide  variety  of  issues.  In 
fact,  the builder was consulted so  often  that for all  practical  pur-
poses  he  was  a  member  of  the  actual  government.  In  addition, 
most decision-makers  accepted  the builder's claim  that what was 
good for him was also good for the township. For example, Levitt 
was  able  to  persuade  the  Utilities Authority not  to link compet-
ing small  shopping  centers  to  the  water  and  sewer  lines  he  had 
built until  he turned the lines over to the township.  In  the early 
years,  the decision-makers  even  checked with  the builder  on de-
cisions  in  which  he  had  no  interest.  Lacking  staff  aid  of  their 
own,  respecting  the  know-how  of  Levitt  executives,  wanting  to 
make sure the firm would not oppose their final  decision, and be-
lieving  that  Levitt  had  the  right  to  be  consulted  on  everything, 
they sought his advice on a wide variety of topics. 

Paying close attention to the builder was also dictated by polit-
ical considerations.  Not only could he exert power at all  levels of 
government,  but many Levittowners were favorably  inclined  to-
ward him, so  that political incentives for opposing him were few. 
Working class residents were grateful  for  the opportunity to buy 
a  suburban  house  they  could  not  hav.e  afforded  otherwise,  and 
middle class  residents,  though  less  grateful,  went along with  his 
demands  as  long  as  they  meant  lower  taxes  or  affected  yet  un-
built neighborhoods.  Only  the  cosmopolitans  opposed  him,  for, 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

being able and willing to look further into the future,  they could 
see  that Levittown could not solve  its  tax problems so  long as  he 
continued  building,  thus  minimizing  their  chance.  to  obtain 
schools and other municipal services that met their upper middle 
class standards. 

The other major  interest group  was  made  up of businessmen 
who  had  bought  land  in  Levittown  and  wanted  to  build  stores 
and shopping centers.  Here,  too,  the  municipal  government was 
generally  eager  to  please.  Wanting  more  taxables  in  the  town-
ship,  it welcomed  the arrival of new businesses-so much so  that 
Planning  Board  meetings  were  sometimes  set  to  accommodate 
the  schedules  of applicants  for  licenses  and  zoning  changes. 

Finally,  the  decision-makers  supported  each  others'  pet  proj-
ects;  protected the vested interests, political domains, and private 
businesses  each  had  staked  out;  and went along with  colleagues' 
personal  grudges. 2  Even  when  beset  by  internal  strife,  the deci-
sion-making  bodies  always  united  to  defend  members  against 
attack from citizens.  For example, school  board members allowed 
a  colleague  to  continue  his  advocacy  of  municipal  recreation 
although the school  system wanted to retain control of recreation 
facilities;  and  the  Township  Committee  did  not  interfere  with 
one  committeeman's  personal  vendetta  against  another  leading 
politician, even though it was politically ruinous. 

Nevertheless,  the model  that best describes decision-making in 
Levittown  is  "political  benefit-cost  accounting,"  for,  generally 
speaking,  the decision-makers tried to evaluate the costs ·and ben-
efits  of any decision  for  their own and  their  party's  political  fu-
ture.8  Of course,  they did not apply such a  model  systematically, 
but  acted  intuitively.  Sometimes  they  had  too  little  informa-
tion about even  the obvious costs  and benefits of their decisions, 
and  rarely  were  they  aware  of  the  subtler  and  long-range  ones. 
Lacking sufficiently detailed  feedback,  they did  not  know  which 
voters  might  be affected  by  a  specific  issue  and  how  they would 
react.  Moreover,  the  personal  values  of  the  decision-makers  and 
their conceptions of the public interest were added to the mix, so 
that  often  decisions  only  approximated  those  suggested  by  the 
model. 

The Responsiveness of the  Decision-making Process 

Although  Levittown's  public  decisions  were  made  by  a  hand-
ful  of  elected  officials,  responding  principally  to  demands  and 

The  Decision-making  Process 

pressures  from  a  small  number  of  Citizens  and  interest  groups, 
many decisions were remarkably responsive to the rest of the citi-
zenry,  particularly  the  lower  middle  class  majority.'  While  I 
could  not  compare  residents'  attitudes  with  decision-maker  ac-
tions on every decision,  the data I  have support the hypothesis of 
responsiveness.  The  random  sample  was  asked  for  its  views  on 
seven major issues, and in all but two the majority of respondents 
supported  the  governmental  decision.  For example,  89  per cent 
favored  (or  had  no  opinion  on)  the  desirability  of  a  city  man-
ager,  56  per cent were  concerned about rising  taxes,  and  7~ per 
cent went  along  with  changing  the  name  of  the  township  from 
Willingboro  to  Levittown.' On the question  of doctors  purchas-
ing  homes  for  office  use,  ~6 per cent were  in  favor,  15  per cent 
had no opinion,  and 49  per cent were  opposed-suggesting why 
the final decision of government was a compromise that restricted 
two  nonresident  doctors  to  a  house.  Likewise,  an  almost  even 
split between those for,  against, and undecided about racial  inte-
gration suggests why the township government and both political 
parties refused to get involved in the issue.' 

Decisions and citizens' attitudes diverged on liquor, and Levit-
towners'  opposition  to  the  Township Committee's approval  of a 
wet  community  contributed  to  the  incumbent  committeeman's 
defeat  at  the  next  election.7  The reduction  of  the  kindergarten 
entry  age,  which  the  school  board  rejected,  was  favored  by  a 
slight majority, but most had no opinion, and the divergence can 
be attributed to  the school  board's minimal  contact with its con-
stituents  at  the  time  of decision. 8  A  1964  survey of attitudes  on 
school  policy among a  much larger sample showed  that the resi-
dents usually favored  the status quo or had no opinion, thus pro-
ducing  convergence  with  school  board  decisions.•  For  example, 
29  per cent wanted smaller elementary school classes,  18  per cent 
wanted  larger ones,  but 53  per cent  preferred no change or had 
no  opinion.  Likewise,  ~o per  cent  favored  higher  expenditures 
for education;  16 per cent, lower ones;  but 54 per cent wanted no 
change or expressed no opinion. No wonder the school board felt 
it had a mandate for a  policy of minimal change. These data can-
not  prove  decision-makers'  responsiveness,  for  the  surveys  were 
conducted  after  the  decisions  were  made,  did  not  limit  them-
selves  to  voters  actually concerned about  the  issue,  and did  not 
measure the intensity of their concern.  Perhaps the best illustra-
tion  of  the  overall  responsiveness  to  the  majority  is  that  when-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

ever  the  decision-makers  went  against  majority  opinion,  they 
promptly  lost  the  next  election.  Only  Levitt  usually  received 
what he wanted, but when his demands were opposed by the resi-
dents,  they  voted  out  the  decision-makers  who  went  along  with 
him. 

The  pattern  of responsiveness  can  be  traced  back  to  the  elec-
tion  systern. 10  The  selection  of  candidates  assured  officeholders 
who  were  representative  of  the  large  mass  of  voters,  and  their 
handling  of  issues  reflected  the  vagueness  and  confusion  which 
the voters themselves felt.  Moreover,  both parties agreed substan-
tially on basic  assumptions.  lloth carne out for  low  taxes, a  mini-
mal  role for government, and decisions that would  favor  the  ma-
jority whenever possible;  both opposed the demands and political 
styles  of working class  people and  upper middle class  cosmopoli-
tans.  Of course,  the  fit  between  candidates  and  community  was 
hardly perfect, and most of the  time  Levittowners felt  they were 
choosing  the  lesser of two  evil  ones.  They grumbled about  poli-
tics,  but they were not dissatisfied enough to act and did not sup-
port minority  factions  or independent slates.  After  all,  decision-
makers  rarely  had  significant  impact  on  the  really  important 
aspects  of their lives;  they  could npt solve  the community's  cen-
tral  problem,  taxes,  and  they  were  not  expected  to  solve  the 
financial,  job,  family,  and  child-rearing  problems  of  individual 
Levittowners. 

But if  the  decision-makers were  responsive  when  the  majority 
demanded  it,  they  were  anything  but  responsive  to  other  than 
the  powerful  minorities.  The election's diffuse  and general  feed-
back apprised the politicians of the majority opinions, but it did 
not inform them of minority demands.  Nor were  the  performing 
and  actual  governments  attuned  to  these  demands,  for  the  per-
formance  was  structured  to assure  the majority that all  was  well, 
and the caucus and parties sought decisions that would attract the 
majority  at  the  next  election.  Moreover,  the  decision-makers 
could not represent minorities either. A  Township Committee of 
three  men  (and  later  of  five)  and  even  a  school  board  of  nine 
made it impossible  to elect minority representatives  to  the actual 
government,  and since decision-makers  sought  unanimity before 
passing ordinances,  there was  little room for  the consideration of 
powerless  minority  opinion.  Even  when  decisions  were  reached 
by  majority  vote,  the  decision-making  body  and  the  issue  itself 
had  to  be  structured  so  as  to  create  a  dichotomous  (or  at  best 

The  Decision-making  Process 

trichotomous)  set  of  alternatives:  for,  against,  or  a  compromise 
that would  swing enough  opposition  votes.  As  a  result,  even  the 
school  board usually split into only two factions,  and when more 
existed,  these  had  to  combine  to  affect  a  board  decision.  Conse-
quently,  the  decision-makers  could  deal  responsively  with  issues 
favored  by a  large  mass  of voters or an  influential  minority,  but 
not with those of significance to a number of less  influential ones. 
Since  minorities were  more  frequent  petitioners for  action  than 
the  majority,  the  decision-makers  were  often  unpopular  with 
small  groups of residents,  which only encouraged  them  to  gener-
ate yet  more  support from  the majority and  to  restrict  feedback 
from  minorities  even  further.  In  effect,  then,  the  government 
could not be responsive  to  the pluralism of the community. 

Sometimes the decision-makers did not even have to be respon-
sive,  for  if  they  had  the  power  to  act  and could  not  be  held  re-
sponsible  for  their actions  by  the  voters,  or  if  the  large  mass  of 
voters did not care,  they were  free  to do as  they pleased.  For ex-
ample,  they  could  sometimes  give  business  contracts  to  their 
friends,  rezone unbuilt portions of the community  to benefit the 
builder  or  other  businessmen,  and  draft  ordinances  to  fit  the 
requests of an influential petitioner-and without evoking much 
protest.  Levittown's  government  was  more  representative  than 
most,  for it lacked appointed positions of  great power or "rotten 
borough"  election  districts  which  would  enable  an  individual 
decision-maker to act without concern for  the voters.  Perhaps  the 
main obstacle to responsiveness, whether to majority or minority, 
was  the  decision-makers'  willingness  to  support  their  colleagues' 
individual interests and personal  biases,  for citizen protest had to 
be  sizeable  before  their  group  solidarity  weakened.  Sometimes, 
then,  "willful individuals can block the intentions of whole com-
munities  for  a  long  time,  numerous  routines  develop  around 
local  positions of influence  . . .  and generally a large number of 
vicious  circles  will  protect  and  reinforce  the  local  conserva-
tism." 11 

INTERVENTION  IN  THE  DECISION-MAKING  PROCESS 

The decision-makers' failure to respond to minorities forces  these 
to  intervene  in  the decision-making  process.  By  applying a  vari-
ety  of  pressures,  interveners  seek  to  overcome  the  performance, 
to make  th~ actual government notice them, and then to divert it 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

from  its  customary  responsiveness  to  majority  and  party  de-
mands.  Some  methods  of  intervention  are  more  effective  than 
others, although  the success  of any given method depends on the 
issue  in question and  the  political  situation of the moment.  But 
if a  large  enough group of voters  is  intensely concerned  over an 
issue  just  before  the  election,  almost any method  is  likely  to  be 
effective. 

At other times, success is compounded of the amount of change 
demanded  and· the  political  pressure  that can  be applied.  Every 
change  requires  some  adjustment  in  the  governmental  routine, 
in  the allocation of funds,  staff, and other scarce resources, and in 
the  network  of mutual  obligations  among  decision-makers,  out-
side as  well as  inside the community. Election victories and party 
control  give  the  decision-makers  a  limited  amount  of  political 
capital  to  invest  in  change,  which  they  spend carefully  to  main-
tain and enhance  their  own  positions. 12  The greater  the  change 
demanded by interveners, therefore,  the more pressure  they must 
generate  to force  the decision-makers  to spend  their capital.  Ob-
viously,  the  best  pressure  is  supplied  by  a  host  of  concerned 
voters,  but when an issue  touches only a few  people (as  it usually 
does),  other  methods  must  be  used.  All  these  seek  to  persuade 
the  decision-makers  to  do  the  interveners'  bidding,  and  if  they 
fail,  to create greater public awareness of the issue  in order to ob-
tain enough political support for  another confrontation with the 
decision-makers.  Awareness  is  best  created  by  arousing  contro-
versy,  for  it  may  get  newspaper  headlines  and  will  at  least  em-
barrass  the decision-makers and  threaten  their performance. 

The first  and most  frequent  intervention strategy  is  to  make a 
public statement demanding a  particular decision.  This  is  effec-
tive  in  getting  the  interveners  into  the  political  arena  and  in 
legitimating their existence,  for  the rules of the democratic  per-
formance  require decision-makers  to  take  note  of a  public state-
ment,  even  when made by a  small  ad hoc group of citizens.  Fur-
ther impetus is  added  if  the statement is  picked  up by the  press, 
and particularly if it receives editorial comment, for  the decision-
makers  believe,  rightly  or  not,  that  editorials  would  not  be 
written  if  they  did  not  represent  a  constituency  of  some  kind. 
The public statement can  take various forms.  Most often it is a 
simple  moral  appeal,  sometimes  arguing  that  the  interveners' 
demands are  in  the  public  interest.  Such appeals are likely  to be 
ineffective,  because  the decision-makers know  that the other side 

The  Decision-making  Process 

•  341  • 

can deliver a moral appeal of equal fervor or will  picture itself as 
a  yet  more faithful guardian of the public interest. If the speaker 
is  an  important  community  figure  or  if  he  delivers  a  good  or 
colorful speech,  it may be reported by the press and thus will  ad-
vertise  the  issue;  if he is  glib,  however,  the moral "power" of the 
appeal is reduced further;  and if he is  hired  talent,  his words are 
totally  wasted,  because  the  decision-makers  know  he  is  only  a 
mercenary.  Occasionally,  the  moral  weight  of  the  appeal  itself 
may be enough  to  make  the decision-makers  pay attention  or to 
arouse  public  support  for  the  interveners  among  the  citizens 
(and no one can predict with certainty whether or not the appeal 
will  do  either),  but  in  a  community  like  Levittown,  grosser 
forms  of  injustice  are  rare,  and  the  inequities  that do  occur are 
too  insignificant  to  shock  most  political  consciences,  either 
among politicians  or citizens. 

One of the most widely used moral appeals is  for "leadership," 
addressed  to  the  most  influential  decision-maker  by  the  least 
powerful claimants in  the  hope  that  it will  flatter  or shame  him 
into  action  in  their  behalf.  A  politician  rarely  listens  to  such 
appeals, for they require him to risk his political capital in behalf 
of an  unpopular solution without likelihood of political  reward. 
In effect,  interveners who call  for  leadership are asking  the  poli-
tician  to  take  responsibility for  a  decision  which  the  rest  of  the 
community  may  not  want and  for  which  it may  punish  him  at 
the next election. 

A  more  extreme  version  of  the  moral  appeal  is  the  attack:  a 
charge  that  decision-makers  are  unfair,  in  collusion  against  the 
interveners,  politically  motivated,  or  paid  off.  Attacks  are  gen-
erally  ineffective  because  decision-makers  can  and  usually  will 
mount a  stronger attack on them in return.  If the attacks are un-
justified-as they often are-the decision-makers seek  to discredit 
the interveners--equally unjustifiably-as agitators. The attackers 
may see  moral  violations where none exist,  misconstruing a  rou-
tine  caucus  as  a  conspiracy  and  a  group  of  political  allies  as  a 
clique,  while  the  decision-makers,  believing  themselves  to  vote 
their conscience, misconstrue charges that they are acting for par-
tisan reasons as  rank injustice.  Both sides may be partly accurate, 
of course, but the attackers, unable to see more than a glimpse of 
the  actual  government,  ascribe  overly  devious  motives  to  its 
members,  whereas  the  decision-makers  are  acting  to  maintain  a 
performance of which they mav be unconscious. 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

A  somewhat different  strategy  is  exaggeration,  used  to  predict 
dire  consequences  of  an  unfavorable  decision.13  For  example, 
when  the  Township  Committee  proposed  to  permit  liquor  in 
Levittown,  opponents  were  soon  predicting  a  bar  on  every 
corner,  even  though  the  ordinance  permitted  only  six  in  the 
entire  community  for  the  next  ten  years.  Exaggeration,  too,  is 
only effective if it attracts further support, however. The decision-
makers have some understanding of the consequences of their de-
cisions,  and  can  counter  with  their  own  exaggerations.  Another 
form  of  this  strategy  is  to exaggerate  the  public support  behind 
the interveners,  by  presenting petitions  or  "stacking"  a  meeting 
with  friends  and neighbors who participate to be helpful, rather 
than  because of their  interest.  If the decision-makers  know  their 
community,  this  technique  is  not  very compelling,  unless  it  en-
rolls  support from  like-minded  but reticent  people who wait for 
a  bandwagon to develop before they will voice  their support. 

If appeals  or attacks  fail,  the  interveners can resort  to  a  coun-
terperformance,  usually  asking  the  government  questions  (to 
which  both  sides  already  know  the  answer)  at  the  public  meet-
ing.  Since  the performing government cannot shut off questions, 
the decision-makers will try to prevent repetitions of the counter-
performance by inviting the participants backstage. For example, 
when  C.A.P.S.  began  to lobby for "better" schools  by asking the 
school board questions about plans for curriculum improvement, 
its  leaders  were  invited  to meet  privately with  the  board  to  dis-
cuss  their  proposals. 14  The decision-makers  may  try  to  persuade 
the interveners that they have made  their point and that further 
counterperformances are superfluous, or they may ask for sympa-
thy  by describing other  pressures  that  prevent  them  from  meet-
ing  the  interveners'  demands.  All  of  these  techniques  are  essen-
tially  attempts  to  coopt  them  into  cooperating  with  the  actual 
government.  If they do  not  work,  and  the counterperformances 
attract public attention, the decision-makers may propose a  com-
promise. 

The effectiveness of the counterperformance is  limited, for  too 
much  repetition  of  questions  and  claims  can  antagonize  the 
decision-makers and the public. Eventually, then,  the interveners 
have  to gather further support and  provide concrete evidence of 
its  existence.  Since  attendance  at  public  meetings  is  m,inimal,  a 
small but repeated turnout of concerned people is quite effective. 
The school board almost gave in on the issue of the kindergarten 

The  Decision-making  Process 

entrance  age  because  the  advocates  were  consistently  able  to 
bring  2o-3o  people  with  them.  The  decision-makers  will,  of 
course,  try  to  find  out  whether  those  who  attend  are  serious  or 
whether they  have come only as  a  favor  to a  friend  or neighbor. 
Petitions also  involve large numbers of people in the interven-
tion process,  but the decision-makers know that many people sign 
them  only  to  please  the  circulators  or  to  get  them  out  of  the 
house.  Unless the signers come to a  public meeting,  it is  assumed 
that  the  signatures  themselves  do  not  indicate  serious  interest. 
For  example,  when  the  opponents  of  nonresident  physicians 
presented a  petition with over 400 names,  the nonresident physi-
cians  brought  in  1200.  Their  use  of  a  commercial  signature-
collecting agency  neutralized  their numerical  superiority and in 
the  end  the  Township  Committee  ignored  the  petitions  alto-
gether  and  effected  a  compromise  between  the  two  points  of 
view. 

For interveners  who  are  small  in  number,  low  in power,  and 
unable to generate widespread public support,  the most effective 
method  is  probably  to  insert  new  "facts"  or  "ideas"  into  the 
decision-making  process.  By  facts  and  ideas,  decision-makers 
mean three things primarily:  political or other consequences of a 
decision,  viewpoints  of  groups  not  previously  considered,  and 
suggestions  for  compromise.  Of course,  intervention  appeals  are 
always  filled  with  facts  and  ideas,  and  most  of  the  time,  the 
decision-makers  have  heard  them all  or are  not interested.  They 
are  not  impressed  by  unprovable  consequences  or  long-range 
ones;  even when they ask  for  new facts,  they may reject those not 
to  their  liking,  as  they  did  when  the  kindergarten  interveners 
supplied  scientific  findings  which  disproved  their  beliefs.  Of 
course, asking for  new information is also one way of postponing 
a  decision;  often  decision-makers  (and  interveners)  call  for  a 
study to  obtain  time  for  enrolling further support for  their  own 
position.  If the  decision  has  not  yet  been  made,  the  decision-
makers may be receptive to new data, but their receptivity varies 
with  the  situation.  If a  compromise  is  called  for,  they  may  be 
eager for  solutions;  otherwise,  they usually  pay attention only to 
new information about important political  or community impli-
cations of alternative decisions. 

In  the  last  analysis,  the  most  effective  method  of  intervention 
is  the  demonstration  of  visible  political  support.  In  Levittown, 
what impressed decision-makers most was a  sizeable and repeated 

•  344  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

turnout  of  personally  concerned  citizens.  For  example,  if  the 
issue dealt with education, they had to be parents whose children 
would  be  affected;  if  it  concerned  a  zoning change,  they  had  to 
live  in  the  area  under  discussion.  The  larger  the  turnout  the 
better, of course,  but no absolute number can  be  predicated,  for 
the  figure  varies  with  tbe  amount of change  being demanded.u 
For example, a  half-dozen complaints about the bus service  from 
Levittown to Philadelphia were  sufficient  to persuade the Town-
ship  Committee  to  ask  the  bus company for  additional  buses.  A 
group  of  four  residents  was  enough  to  have  six  small  neighbor-
hood shopping areas which had been proposed in the master phn 
eliminated through a zoning ordinance revision. They called and 
wrote  to  the  builder,  the  Township  Committee,  the  township 
building inspector, and the Governor, and they submitted a  peti-
tion  signed  by  all  residents  adjacent  to  the  proposed  sites.  Al-
though  they  exaggerated  their actual  support, Levitt's reluctance 
to  displease  people  who  had  already  purchased  homes  and  his 
lack of enthusiasm about the proliferation of neighborhood shop-
ping  areas  suggested  by  the  township's  planning  consultant  re-
sulted  in  successful  intervention.  In  this  instance,  then,  deter-
mined activity  by a  concerned  handful  which  accorded  with  the 
preferences of the agencies making the change was  sufficient. 

Conversely,  almost  400  petition signatures  and  20  to  30  inter-
veners  who  attended  school  board  meetings  regularly  were  not 
enough to alter the kindergarten entry age,  because  it required a 
change  in  attitude  on  the  part  of  school  board  members  and, 
more  important,  a  change  in  established  school  board  policy 
which  contradicted  the  policies  of  other  boards  in  Burlington 
County  and  the  recommendations  of  the  State  Department  of 
Education. On the other hand,  150 angry Levittowners at a  pub-
lic  hearing  effected  a  compromise  on  the  nonresident  doctor 
issue,  but  a  slightly  smaller  number  could  not  convince  the 
Township Committee to keep Levittown dry.  In the doctor issue, 
a  compromise  did  not  require  thwarting  the  builder;  in  the 
liquor  issue,  no  compromise  was  possible,  and  evidently  the  in-
terveners were  not numerous enough  to convince  the  Township 
Committee  to  cross  the  builder.  Six  hundred  even  angrier  citi-
zens  who  attended  the  1961  school-budget  public  hearing  were 
unaJ:>le  to  force  a  further  reduction  in  the  budget  because  this 
would have  required  the school  board  to  increase  class  size,  thus 
alienating teachers and  the  State Department of Education. 

Only an intensive study of many issues would make it possible 

The  Decision-making  Process 

•  345  • 

to determine accurately  the numbers needed for successful  inter-
vention.  Levittown  experience  shows  that  a  small  number  can 
sometimes  achieve  its  aim,  but  that  in  order  to  reverse  a  major 
government decision, concerted intervention from at least 5 to  15 
per  cent  of  the  com1p.unity,  (above  and  beyond  constant  inter· 
veners,  clearly  identifiable minority voters,  and opposition  party 
members)  is  necessary,  and  probably  a  larger  proportion  for 
more  permanent  policy change.  These figures  suggest  that  inter-
vention can be effective and can even  overcome the wishes  of the 
majority on some  issues.  If interveners demand  significant  struc-
tural  change  in  government,  however,  they  must  have  support 
from at least a  majority of the population or more,  because such 
change  has  repercussions  on  outside  governments  and  political 
systems,  which will  exert  pressure  on  local  politicians  to  prevent 
alterations in the  status quo. 

What Levittown experience cannot show  is  the effectiveness of 
intervention methods such as demonstrations, protest marches, sit-
ins,  and riots.  Middle class suburbanites are unlikely  to use such 
methods,  but  if  these  became  necessary,  they  would  perhaps  be 
met  first  with  frenzied  performances  to  maintain  equilibrium, 
and  then  with repression,  after which  the decision-makers would 
slowly  begin  to make concessions  in  the most face-saving manner 
possible,  provided, of course  that such  concessions did not gener-
ate a  yet larger group of people opposed  to  them.  If they do,  the 
decision-makers  are caught in the middle  and  may resort  to  per-
formance solutions which  try to persuade the interveners that gov-
ernment is  on  their side,  and convince  the opposition  that it will 
not make basic changes.  Local  government's  power to change so-
ciety is  limited, and intervention for  this purpose ought to be di-
rected  against  the  federal  government  and  the  corporate  econ-
omy.  The  former  will  only  be  impressed  by  an  intervening 
group  of  massive  proportions,  however,  and  the  latter  does  not 
need to be responsive  to  interveners at all  unless they can mount 
a sizeable work stoppage or consumer boycott.  Local  intervention 
can only hope to affect  the national bodies if it takes place in sev-
eral  communities  at  once,  and  cannot  be  explained  away  as  an 
effect of distinctively  local  political  or economic conditions. 

TYPES  OF INTERVENERS 

Most  of the groups  who  sought  to  intervene  in  Levittown  were 
ad  hoc.  Indeed,  permanent  ones  tended  to  become  interest 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

groups  which  were  consulted  before  a  decision  relevant  to  their 
concerns  was  reached.  One  permanent  though  unorganized 
group  was  not  consulted  regularly,  however,  and  became  a  con-
sistent and active intervener-the cosmopolitans. 

The Cosmopolitans 

The cosmopolitans are colleg€-educated and are usually profes-
sionals  with  upper  middle _class  life  styles.  Although  they  are 
quite  active  locally,  their  appro<~ch  to  the  community  is  extra-
local;  they seek to realize an ideal community which stems from a 
nationwide  and  even  worldwide  culture. 16  The  ideal  places  a 
high  value  on  education.  Cosmopolitans  want  a  high-quality 
school  system  to  prepare youngsters  for  the  best  universities and 
professional  careers,  as  well  as  facilities  for adult education,  edu-
cational  kinds  of  recreation,  and  high  culture.  Government and 
politics, they feel,  should be liberal and reform, with emphasis on 
progressive  public  welfare,  medical  and  mental  health  services, 
decision-making  by  experts and  technicians  rather  than  by  poli-
ticians, a  nonpartisan political structure that follows  the norms of 
democratic  theory,  long-range  and master  planning,  and  a  maxi-
mum of  intense and selfless  citizen  participation.  Their commu-
nity  should  be  governed  by  liberal-professional  upper  middle 
class values. 

Cosmopolitans can  be found in every community, but  they are 
particularly  visible  in  new communities and  in  those  where  the 
majority is of lower income and status.U There, the cosmopolitan 
"set"  is  small  and  scattered  and  the  mutual  antagonism  that  de-
velops  in  relationships  with  lower-status  neighbors  soon  forces 
them  to  find  friends  outside  the  block and  to set  up community· 
wide  organizations  that  express  their  values.  Since  they  enjoy 
civic  participation and  are  often  highly  skilled  in fact-gathering 
and  political  advocacy,  they  frequently  become  active  in  the 
community and  in  its  government  long  before  other  groups do. 
For  example,  in  Park  Forest,  Illinois,  they  pressed  for  the  in-
corporation of the new community as a  village,  organized  its first 
government,  and  stayed  in  power  for  several  years,  even  though 
the  community  had  meanwhile  become  predominantly  lower 
middle class. 18 

In  Levittown,  the  prior  existence  of  governing  bodies  forced 
the  cosmopolitans  to  become  interveners  from  the  start.  Al-
though  their  main  concern  has  been  with  education,  they  have 

The  Decision-making  Process 

•  347  • 

also  been active  in  recreation,  planning, racial  integration, men-
tal  health,  "the  juvenile  problem,"  and  social  welfare. 19  They 
established  or helped  to  establish  the  League of Women Voters, 
the  Citizens  Association  for  Public  Schools,  the  Burlington 
Comity  Human  Relations  Council,  and  a  Good  Government 
slate  that ran  unsuccessfully  in  the  1961  election.  They ran  indi-
vidual candidates for Township Committee and the Board of Ed-
ucation  and  tried  to  influence  the  activities  of  many  other 
groups. 

Considering  their  numerical  strength,  their  ability  to  inter-
vene  was  surprising.  There were  probably not more than a  hun-
dred  cosmopolitans  in  Levittown  during  the  time  of  my  study, 
and less  than a  third of these were active  interveners.20  Although 
their demands were  usually rejected,  they were able  to negotiate 
some  successful  compromises.  For  example,  a  handful  of  cosmo-
politans  eventually obtained a  settlement from  the  school  board 
by which children who passed entrance tests could be admitted to 
the  kindergarten  before  the  age  of  five.  They  persuaded  the 
school  system  to raise its academic standards somewhat and to de-
velop  formal  policies  for  its operations.  In  xg61,  two  cosmopoli-
tans ran for  the school board and temporarily dominated the ma-
jority faction,  but they  never  persuaded  either  the  board  or  the 
staff  to  endorse  their  ideas  for  upper middle  class  education.  In 
township affairs  the cosmopolitans  were  less  successful;  although 
they  frequently  appeared  as  critics  of  the  Township Committee 
and  the  Planning Board,  they lacked  the  party  ties  and  political 
strength  needed  to  force  the  decision-makers  into  compromises. 
The cosmopolitans were most successful  when  they were  in ac-
cord with the rest of the community and functioned as  technicans 
and  experts  in  behalf of majority demands  or as  initiators of ac-
tions  that  the  majority  would  eventually  support. For  example, 
an active cosmopolitan sat  on  the  Government Study  group  that 
recommended the city manager form of government, and its  final 
report  was  based  largely  on  his  recommendations.  Another  lob-
bied  almost  singlehandedly  in  Trenton  to  reduce  residence  re-
quirements  for  school  board  members  from  three  years  to  two. 
The  same  two  people  initiated  the  campaign  that  changed  the 
township's  name  back  to  Willingboro  and  spearheaded  the  suc-
cessful  attack  on  the  Township  Committee  to  revoke  an  ordi-
nance  permitting  garden  apartments  in  Levittown.  Thev  also 
tried  to fight  Levitt's plan for  the routing of a  new state  highway 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

through  the  community,  and  even  sought  to  call  a  halt  to  his 
building program  until  tax receipts  could catch  up with  the ex-
panded  municipal  services  they  deemed  desirable,  but  on  these 
issues they could not generate community support. 

The cosmopolitans were skilled  interveners because they had a 
strong and continuing interest in a  number of important issues, 
were  well  equipped to argue  their case,  could propose  new  facts 
and ideas to the decision-makers, and were able to enroll support 
from  like-minded Levittowners.  But their persistence,  their abil-
ity to debate, and their reluctance to give in also created antagon-
ism that sometimes reduced their effectiveness. For one thing, the 
cosmopolitans  seemed  to  be involved  in  everything.  Their con· 
stant  and  dedicated  activism  confounded  the  decision-makers, 
who expected citizens  to participate only sporadically.  And since 
most of the cosmopolitan activity was generated by a  few  people, 
they  were  highly  visible.  When conflict  arose  and  tempers grew 
heated, it was  easy  to think of them as  malcontents and agitators. 
Their  style  of  intervention  added  to  the  antagonism.  They 
considered  themselves  idealists,  defending  the  public  interest of 
the  community  against  selfish  forces.  Like  everyone  else,  they 
assumed  that  their  values  were  the  only  desirable  ones;  they 
could  not see  that  what  they considered  the  public  interest was 
often  only  an  impersonal,  but  nevertheless  upper  middle  class 
(and therefore  self-)  interest. But as  idealists,  they felt  themselves 
also  to  be  morally  and  otherwise  superior,  and  as  well-educated 
people  they  believed  the  opposition  (and  the  decision-makers) 
were  acting  out  of  ignorance-and  this  attitude  upset  everyone 
with  whom  they  disagreed.  Yet  for  all  their  education,  the  cos-
mopolitans  were  as  ethnocentric  as  other  Levittowners;  the  re-
pugnance they felt toward their neighbors' way of life was at least 
as  strong as  the  neighbors'  for  cosmopolitan culture. 

Their  consistent  appeal  to  idealism,  principle,  and  morality 
typed  their opponents as  expedient,  unprincipled, and immoral, 
and  naturally  produced  considerable  hostility  from  them.  And 
since  they  argued  from  principle  they  confused  the  decision-
makers,  who  were  looking  for  more  personal  forms  of  self-
interest.  For example,  they argued for  long-range  planning even 
when they expected  to leave Levittown in a few  years.  Nor could 
the  decision-makers  bargain  with  them;  the  cosmopolitans  saw 
their  priorities  as  absolute  values,  rejecting  all  others  and  pre-
cluding compromise. While this was good strategy for a  counter-

The  Decision-making  Process 

performance,  it  was  hardly  an  effective  method  of  intervention 
for a politically weak minority. As  idealists, the cosmopolitans did 
not  think  in  strategic  terms,  however;  they  stuck  by  their  prin-
ciples and almost welcomed  the resulting antagonism as  a valida-
tion of their own goals. 21 

Part  of  the  conflict  must  be  ascribed  to  cultural  differences. 
The cosmopolitans were  of  higher socioeconomic  level  than  the 
decision-makers, and they communicated this without ever saying 
so.  They did  not defer  to  them as  people or as  officeholders,  but 
confronted  them  as  equals  or  betters.  They could  not  be  intim-
idated  by  power  and  were  sometimes  accused  of lacking  respect 
for  authority.  Their  inability  or  unwillingness  to  realize  that 
they  had no  power  made  their demands seem  even  more  imper-
tinent,  and  their tone grated  on  the decision-makers,  who  retal-
iated  by flexing  their  political  muscles  in  public confrontations. 
The  decision-makers  argued  that  Levittown  was  not  Brookline, 
and  privately  they  muttered  that  these  people  should  not  have 
bought  homes  in  Levittown  in  the  first  place.  Their  hostility 
built up over  the years,  and  eventually resulted  in  a  smear cam-
paign  against  one  of  the  leading  cosmopolitans  which  almost 
forced  her out of public office  and  led  to  her defeat  at  the  next 
election. 

Even  so,  the cosmopolitans could not  be  dismissed  altogether, 
even  by  the  decision-makers.  If they  insisted  on  trying  to  have 
their own goals adopted for public policy much of the  time,  they 
were also calling attention to crucial community problems which 
the  elected  officials,  responding  to  the  voters'  demands  for  opti-
mism, did not want to discuss. For example, when  the cosmopoli-
tans  advocated  higher  school  budgets and  long-range  planning, 
they were not only proposing an upper middle class set of munic-
ipal services,  but were also  pointing to the need  to do something 
about the inadequate  tax base;  and when  they criticized Levitt's 
power,  they  were  raising  questions  that  also  bothered  the  deci-
sion-makers. As  a result,  they were sometimes consulted privately 
by the same  officials  who rejected  their  intervention  in  public.22 
The  cosmopolitans'  overall  effectiveness  as  interveners  is  not 
easy  to evaluate. On the one hand, the hostility they created test-
ifies to their ability to raise  issues and plant seeds of doubt in the 
decision-makers'  minds.  On  the  other  hand,  they  might  have 
been  more  successful  had  some  of  the  cultural  differences  that 
aroused  hostility,  but  were  tangential  to  the  issues,  been  mini-

•  350  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

mized.  I£  the  cosmopolitans  had  been  more  relativistic,  distin-
guishing between demands which reflected only their upper mid-
dle  class  values  and  those  which  were  shared  by  lower  middle 
class  Levittowners,  they  might  have  been  able  to establish coali-
tions  with  the  latter.  Had  they  been  more  sensitive  to  the  way 
they  threatened  the  decision-makers,  they  might  have  let  others 
do  the public  intervening on issues  not limited to upper middle 
class demands.  And if they had been less certain of the universal-
ity  of  their  principles,  they  might  have  implemented  more  of 
their  ideas  through  compromise,  although  they  might  also  have 
been  coopted  or  dismissed  entirely  because  of  the  smallness  of 
their  numbers. 

Yet  the very "idealism" and intractability which brought forth 
so  much  hostility  also  generated  the  motive  power,  the  dedica-
tion, and the persistence with which  they intervened. I£ they had 
been less  convinced of the myth that they alone were fighting for 
Levittown's salvation,  they might not have been able to continue 
the battle. Asking them to be relativistic and realistic might have 
dampened their spirits and caused them to give up when the odds 
were  against  them.  Moreover,  in  order  to  generate  public  sup-
port,  some  people  have  to  take  purely moral  stands,  although  if 
they are  to  be  effective  interveners,  others  on  their  side  have  to 
act  strategically,  to  incorporate  the  moral  stand  into  the  inter-
vention  process.  "Radicals"  who  put  moral  pressure  on  the  Es-
tablishment are consequently as  necessary  as  "coalitionists" who 
work for change within "the system." The cosmopolitans were too 
few  in  number  to  take  both  moral  and  strategic  roles,  and  be-
sides,  if they had taken the latter, they might have been punished 
for  selling out by moral  advocates  in  their group.  Principled  in-
tegrity was  one  of  the  cosmopolitans'  strongest  weapons,  and  if 
they  failed,  the  fault  lay  also  with  other  political  minorities  in 
Levittown who did not know how  to  use  their help in  battles of 
community-wide  significance.  But the  class  differences  were  just 
too great to be hurdled even for  political advantage. 

The Individual  liB Intervener:  The  Role of the Expert 

American  democratic  theory  is  staunchly  individualistic;  it 
asserts  that  the  lone  political  leader,  aided  only  by  the  deus  ex 
machina called  "leadership," can  divert government from  its ac-
customed path, and that the individual citizen can intervene suc-
cessfully  in  the affairs  of government provided he  is  determined 

The  Decision-making  Process 

•  351  • 

enough and has right on his side. Levittowners, sharing this faith 
wholeheartedly,  were  disappointed  when  leaders  did  not  lead, 
and  disturbed  when  decision-makers  did  not  do  their  bidding. 
They could  not  see  that  a  governmental  change  affecting  many 
thousands of people will  not be undertaken just because an indi-
vidual desires it, and they failed  to realize  that politics is a group 
game  which  pays  little  attention  to  an  individual  intervener. 
When  the  community  is  new,  however,  and  political  organiza-
tions and communication systems are still fledglings,  the individ-
ual may have a chance. For example, Levittown's Superintendent 
of Schools could institute a comprehensive reading program virtu-
ally by fiat,  and William  Levitt was  similarly able  to decide  that 
house  types  should  be  mixed  on  the  streets  of  his  new  commu-
nity.  Even  so,  both  men  had  to  check  out  their  decision  with 
others.  Levitt's executives argued strenuously  that  mixing house 
types  would hurt sales,  and  if  they could  have  proved  their case, 
)..evitt might have  had to agree.  Althoug-h  he owned the firm,  he 
could not insist on change that might alienate his staff.  Once the 
community is  established, few  individuals can "buck the system." 
Even a  politician who campaigns on a single issue and wins office 
in  a  landslide  can  only  implement  his  mandate  if  he  has  the 
authority and the power to force change on the bureaucracy-and 
with  the  electorate  behind  him,  he  is  hardly  acting  as  an  indi-
vidual.23  The lone  intervener  is  only deceiving  himself if he  ex-
pects to change his community all by himself. 

Perhaps  the most effective  individual  intervener is  the expert. 
If he comes from outside the community, he is  thought to be free 
of  political  entangl<:ments  and  can  use  his  technical  skills  and 
professional  reputation  to  urge  change.  Experts  are  normally 
hired for purposes other than intervention, but in a  middle class 
community,  they  are  brought  in  as  interveners  as  well,  because 
middle class citizens believe that facts and expertise can overcome 
politics.24  Working class  people are more  skeptical,  and  also  dis-
trust  the expert, sensing rightly  that his  expertise  usually results 
in recommendations  that favor  the  middle class.25  Yet  even  mid-
dle class  people will  reject  the  expert when  his  solutions do not 
agree  with  their goals.  When  he  is  called  in  to  solve  a  so-called 
technical problem-for example, to advise on the number of Sun-
day school classrooms needed by a church-his intervention is ac-
cepted,  not  only  because  he  has  the  technical  answers,  but  be-
cause  of  consensus  on  the  desirability' of  maximum  religious 

•  852  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

education. When the Library Association called on the county li-
brarian's expertise  to  help  plan a  local  library,  however,  her ad-
vice was  ignored when it became evident that the library she  had 
in mind was  much bigger and more costly than that her sponsors 
envisaged. 

Most experts are professionally committed to  the activities and 
institutions about which  they possess  expertise;  they recommend 
the  best  and  most  expensive  programs,  defending  these  with 
technical data and "standards" (for example, those requiring one 
acre  of  playground  for  every  Soo  residents)  which  are  made  up 
by associations composed of fellow professionals. I£ an  expert up-
holds these  standards as  inviolable and  proposes decisions  which 
the  community  is  unwilling  to  adopt,  opposition  is  sure  to  de-
velop.  At  first,  the  attacks  are  likely  to  be  apolitical;  in  Levit-
town,  they  questioned  the  expert's  mystique,  arguing  that  "he 
cannot  be  controlled"  or  "he  is  too  egocentric."  If the  expert 
admits  that the  standards are  too  high and  bargains  for  the  best 
compromise,  he  begins  to  play  a  political  role,  leaving  himself 
open to charges of political interest. He often avoids  this position 
by defending the standards but suggesting that their full  achieve-
ment take place gradually. Even so,  he may not be able to escape 
political  entanglement.  If there  is  opposition  to  his  sponsors  or 
his  ideas,  the  other  side  will  find  experts  with  different  recom-
mendations. When the kindergarten issue was  being debated, the 
interveners collected expert advice  favoring  early entry,  but  the 
school  board  came  back  with  other  experts  who  proved  it  was 
harmful.  Later,  when  C.A.P.S.  proposed  a  consultant  who  had 
served  the  Brookline  schools,  the  board  argued  that  Levittown 
needed experts accustomed  to advising less  affluent communities. 
Experts  of  unquestioned  national  repute  can  sometimes  make 
recommendations stick  merely on  the  basis of  their reputations, 
but  such  men  are  not  likely  to  be  consulted  by  small  commu-
nities. If their fame  is  limited to cosmopolitan circles,  lower mid-
dle  class  people  may  not  be  impressed  at all.  When  Levittown's 
Human  Relations  Council  brought  in  a  group  of  nationally 
known  race  relations experts  to speak  to a  workshop on integra-
tion,  some  attending  Levittowners  dismissed  their  remarks  as 
those of unknown  outsiders brought in to convert them to  toler-
ance. 

Expertise alone is  thus rarely sufficient for  successful  interven-
tion,  because  even  its  detached  and scientific  aura  is  not strong 

The  Decision-making  Process 

enough  to  overcome  political  considerations.  The  expert  has 
more  power  than  the  resident  intervener,  but  his  "intervention 
potential" is  translated  into effective intervention only when  po-
litical support is generated behind his advice. Without it,  the ex-
pert  can  do  little  to  change  the  decisions  of  the  actual  govern-
ment. 

DECISION-MAKING,  INTERVENTION, 
AND  THE  POWER  STRUCTURE 

The  ongoing  decision-making  process  in  a  local  community  is 
best described as  a dialectic,  in which  the decision-makers seek  to 
maintain  the  actual  government  in  equilibrium,  and  the  inter-
veners,  to  upset  it. 26  The  aims  of equilibrium  are  the  preserva-
tion  of order and  the  retention  of  power;  those  of intervention, 
to  disturb  the  actual  government  (and  its  associated  perform-
ances)  sufficiently to force the decision-makers to restore order  by 
acceding  to  intervener demands.  In  this  process,  interveners  are 
aided  by  the  opposition  party,  which  shares  their strategic  aims 
but not  their substantive  demands.  It tries  to  upset  the  equilib-
rium by finding weak spots in the performance that will enable it 
to demonstrate the incumbents' ineffectiveness or dishonesty, and 
by  giving  political  aid  to  interest  groups  whose  demands  or 
power  are  threatened  by  the  decision-makers.  The  opposition 
constantly challenges  the incumbents in symbolic ways,  accusing 
them of partisanship or neglect of the  public interest in the hope 
that  it  will  evoke  political  support.  Interest  groups  and  voter 
blocs  may play  the same game,  testing the decision-makers  to de-
termine  whether  their  power  is  still  being  recognized.  For  ex-
ample,  when  community  ceremonies  were  scheduled  in  Levit-
town,  civic  groups  and  service  clubs  scrambled  for  prominent 
places  in  the  program  to  demonstrate  their  power  in  much  the 
same way as  Soviet officials do when they line up to greet visiting 
heads of state at a  Kremlin reception. 

The outcome of the never-ending dialectic is a constant struggle 
for  position  which  involves  not  only  decision-makers,  inter-
veners, and political parties, but also other organized elements in 
the  community.  Every  action,  be  it a  government  decision  or a 
voluntary association  officer's  resignation,  is  interpreted as  a  po-
litical move, even when it is not. The participants in the dialectic 
always seek  total victory, for compromise is viewed as  a  defeat by 

•  354  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

the holders of power, as  "selling out" by the interveners, and as a 
"deal"  by  the  uninvolved  citizenry.  Consequently,  all  relation-
ships  take  place  in  an  atmmphere  of  suspicion  and  tension.  Ex-
perienced politicians,  whether  in city  hall  or in  a  voluntary asso-
ciation,  are  accustomed  to  this  state  of affairs,  and  the  amateurs 
eventually  become  resigned  to  it,  but  the  citizens  see  it  as  shot 
through with dishonesty and hypocrisy.  Since it does. not concern 
them  vitally,  however,  they  play  the  bemused  bystanders,  and 
chalk it up to "politics." 27 

This  view  of  the  decision-making  process  departs  somewhat 
from  the  contemporary  political  science  conception  which  em-
phasizes  the  role  of  power  structures,  informal  bodies  that  mo-
nopolize  or  dominate  community  decision-making.  One  theory 
isolates  permanent  power elites,  composed  of a  small  set  of  indi-
vidual  leaders  and  interest  groups  (mainly  from  the  business 
community)  which  has  sufficient  power  to  make  decisions  with-
out  paying  attention  to  the  citizenry.28  Another-more  reason-
able-theory identifies a  number of individual  (and often tempo-
rary)  power  structures,  each  generated  by  a  specific  issue,  with 
some  overlap  in  membership  depending  on  the  total  array  of 
issues  and  the  distribution  of  power  in  the  particular  commu-
nity.29  This model  leaves  more  room  for  citizens,  since  the  poli-
ticians  representing  them  can  incorporate  their demands  in  the 
decision-making process. 

My analysis  tends  to  follow  the second  theory,  but being con-
cerned  not  only  with  how  decisions  are  made  but  also  with  the 
responsiveness  of  the  process  to  the  community,  I  have  placed 
more  stress  on  the role  of citizens.  Their activities  do  not,  how-
ever,  preclude  the  existence  of  a  power  structure  in  Levittown, 
for  the  incumbent  party  leaders,  elected  officials,  and  the  Levitt 
organization  constituted  such  a  structure.  Indeed,  as  I  noted  in 
Chapter Seven, the builder's imposing influence, the power of the 
Democratic  party  leader  and  the  Catholic  bloc,  as  well  as  some 
distinctive  features  of  the  community,  have  made  the  power 
structure somewhat more monolithic  than  those  found  by politi-
cal  scientists  in  established  communities,  although  its  members 
tend  to  be  leading  citizens,  politicians,  and  municipal  officials 
rather  than  business  leaders.  As  a  purely residential  community, 
Levittown lacked the array of commercial and industrial interests 
that  are  usually  found  at  the  top  of  the  political  pyramid,  and 
gave a  larger role to organizational officers and vote-bloc  leaders. 

The  Decision-making  Process 

Since  the  community  was  still  under  construction,  the  builder 
played  an  unsually  prominent  role;  and  since  the  community 
was  still  new,  political  issues  had  not  yet  become  sufficiently  di-
versified  to generate a  wide variety of power structures. Also,  as  a 
suburban  middle  class  community,  Levittown  was  without  the 
low-income, nonwhite population which makes up a sizeable pro-
portion of the  urban constituency, but is  nevertheless  largely  ex-
cluded from  the decision-making process by poverty, segregation, 
low  political  skill,  and  its  habitual  support  of  Democratic  ma-
chine  candidates.  Even  the  most  excluded  interveners  in  Levit-
town were therefore more adequately represented in  the decision-
making process  than are the Negro lower class citizens of Chicago 
or New Haven. 

IMPROVING  THE  DECISION-MAKING  PROCESS 

The  picture  I  have  drawn  of  Levittown's  politics  and  decision-
making  is  not  a  pretty  one,  and  it would  be  easy  to  charge  the 
community's  political  institutions  with  being  undemocratic  and 
ineffective. To do so would be to assume  that they could function 
according to formal  democratic  theory,  but the self-righteousness 
of such an assumption  will  not eliminate  the conflicting realities 
of American political  behavior. If a community is  heterogeneous, 
and  if  the  citizens  restrict .their  participation  to  periodic  ballot-
ing except  when  their  personal  interests  are  at  stake,  yet  expect 
the decision-makers to observe altruistic democracy,  the resulting 
political  system  will  produce  decision-makers  and  decisions  that 
cater  to  majority  wishes  at  election  and  powerful  minority  de-
mands between  times,  hiding the process  behind the performing 
fa\ade.  However flawed  this system may be, people will be willing 
to maintain it-even while grumbling about its faults-so long as 
they  need  or  want  to  maintain  heterogeneity,  nonparticipation, 
and the electoral system of majority rule. 

Politics  could  only  be  different  if  people's  political  behavior 
and  values  or  government's  functions  would  change.  If citizens 
were so homogeneous  that differences about issues were minimal, 
feedback restriction,  the performance, and other means of coping 
with  heterogeneity  would  be  unnecessary; 
the  voters  could 
simply  hire  the  best  trained  or  most  highly  motivated  among 
them to carry out the popular consensus. If everyone participated 
in  government  as  intensely as  in  the  family,  all  decisions  would 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

receive  considerable  discussion,  decision-makers  would  be  more 
responsive  to  the  constituency,  and  performances  to  hide  dis-
agreement  would  no  longer  be  needed,  although  some  fonn  of 
caucus might be required to hammer out agreement among hete-
rogeneous  citizens.  Conversely,  if  government  were  radically 
different,  if  it were  like  the  family  and  provided emotional  sup-
port, and if the political leader were really a father figure,  people 
would  presumably participate  more,  more  informally,  and with-
out  such  diverse  interests.  And  if it  were  like  the  church,  they 
would  participate  with  less  insistence  on  having  their own  per-
sonal  interests satisfied. 

Such medieval alternatives are abhorrent.  More constructively, 
Paul  Goodman  has  long argued  for  small  communities and gov-
ernmental  decentralization  so  that  people  can  participate  more 
directly;  he advocates,  among other things,  a  school  of one  hun-
dred  students,  to  be  run  by  their  parents.80  If people  were  re-
quired  to  participate,  they  undoubtedly  would,  but if  a  hetero-
geneous  group  of  parents  set  up a  school,  they  might  argue  in-
definitely  about  what  it  should  teach  and  how,  and  the  school 
would never  be  built.  Goodman would argue, and justifiably so, 
that the process of setting up the school will be more educational 
than  its  actual  operation-but then  he  is  not  particularly  inter-
ested  in children learning the technical  skills  for  functioning  in 
the larger society.  Even so,  his idea deserves  to be tried, although 
it may happen that parents and children with less intense interest 
in  education  than  Goodman  himself  would  eventually  delegate 
the  task  to  their  more  highly  motivated  neighbors,  who  would 
then function much like a school board and staff.31 

That  a  small  community  and  a  decentralized  government 
alone  would  increase  participation  is  also  doubtfl!ll.  The  Israeli 
kibbutzim  achieved  almost  total  member  participation  in  gov· 
ernment during the early years, but as soon as the Tecurring crises 
which  threatened  their  existence  had  passed,  many  settlers 
handed  the  decision-making  responsibility  to  people  who  were 
interested in being leaders, and spent their free  time in the same 
individual  and  family  pursuits  found  in  an  American  suburb.82 
What  the  well-educated,  culturally  and  ideologically  homoge-
neous,  and  politically  sophisticated  kibbutz  members  were  un-
willing  to  do cannot  be  expected  from  American  suburbanites. 
Yet  even  if  people  like  the  Levittowners  were  dissatisfied 
enough with the status quo to demand or accept decentralization, 

The  Decision-making  Process 

•  857  • 

the  decision-making  process  would  not  change  significantly  so 
long as  they believe  that altruistic democracy ought to determine 
governmental  operations.  This  belief stems  from  three  sources: 
the  schools,  the  citizens'  detachment  from  the  political  process, 
and  their application  of  primary-group  morality  to  it. 

The modern public school  was  founded as  part of an intensely 
antipolitical  nineteenth  century  social  movement;  it  has  there-
fore  taught altruistic democracy for  over a  hundred  years,  keep-
ing  the  realities  of  politics  out of  its  courses.  Many  teachers  as-
sume  naively  that  if  students  learn  only  an  ideal  concept  of 
politics,  they will  put it  into  practice when  they  become  adults, 
and  thereby  reform  society.  Educators  are  also  often  conserva-
tive;  they  see  government  itself as  nonpolitical,  and  think  only 
those who question its decisions are acting politically. Politics be-
ing evil,  the  efforts  of  the  interveners are  left  out of  the curric-
ulum.33  More  sophisticated  teachers  can  be  found  here  and 
there,  but  schools  are  not  supposed  to  generate  controversy,  so 
that  social  studies  ,courses  favor  history  and  antiseptic  descrip-
tions  of  current  events.34  In  many  communities,  teachers  who 
bring  political  controversies  into  the  classroom  have  found  that 
disagreeing  parents communicate  their  opposition  to  the  school 
board,  forcing  them  to  go  back  to  teaching  noncontroversial 
ideals. 

What students fail  to  learn  in  school  they  pick up later when 
they  need  it,  and  if  the  civics  curriculum  has  any  influence  on 
adult  beliefs  it  is  largely  because  most  citizens are  so  untouched 
by  governmental  activities  that  they  have  no  need  for  more 
realistic  beliefs.  Faith  in  altruistic  democracy  is  a  direct  conse-
quence  of  the  irrelevance  of government  to  their  everyday  lives 
and aspirations. As a result,  they apply primary-group morality to 
politics,  believing  that  politics  should  be  guided  by  the  same 
norms  that rule family  relationships and friendship,  and  that de-
viations  can  be  explained  by  the  personal  dishonesty  of  indi-
vidual  politicians.  In  the  process,  their  lack  of  consciousness 
about  self-interest  in  primary-group  relations  is  transferred  to 
their political role as well. 

The alternative  to  this  state  of  affairs  is  not  relinquishing  of 
faith in democracy or morality,  but for  the citizenry to  be "polit-
icized"-to  learn  that  politics  is  a  universal  phenomenon;  that 
all  matters about which  disagreement  exists  are  by nature  polit-
ical;  that the resolution  of disagreement is  the role of the  politi-

•  358  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

ciao, and that this role  is  guided by nonfamilial  norms.  Politici-
zation  requires  a  relativistic  outlook,  the  pluralistic  assumption 
that  other  people's  interests  may  be as  moral  as  one's  own,  and 
the  ability  to  accept  compromise.  In  addition,  people  have  to 
realize  that everyone's demands are a  mixture of self-interest and 
community concern, and  to restrain the temptation of condemn-
ing  nonaltruistic  demands.  For  example,  Levittowners  should 
have  been pleased rather than disturbed that self-interest by vol-
untary  associations  motivated  them  to  provide  community  ser-
vices  that  would  not  have  existed  otherwise.  Unfortunately,  al-
truistic democracy encourages people to judge political events by 
the  motives  of  the  pa£ticipants,  instead of by  their actions.  The 
goodness of a  decision  cannot,  however,  be determined  from  the 
decision-makers'  motives--even if these could be identified-but 
only  from  the  consequences  of  that  decision  for  the  individual 
and the community. 

Politicization,  pluralism,  a  broader  view  of  self-interest,  and 
the substitution of action  for  motive  in judging decisions would 
make for  effective democracy.  Politics would  become more open 
and  above  board,  and  disagreement  and  conflict  would  be  ac-
cepted  without  the  undesirable  side  effects  that  develop  when 
these  are  repressed  through  performances.  Distrust of politicians 
would  also  be  reduced,  and  once  people  realize  that  politicians 
usually  act  as  they  do  because  of  the  pressures  on  them,  they 
would learn in yet another way that they have to intervene in the 
decision-making process themselves if they want change. 

Beliefs cannot  be altered by demonstrating  their inapplicabil-
ity or irrationality, however,  and new ones cannot be created by 
appealing  to  people  to  be  sensible.  They  usually  change  when 
the  situations  and  institutions  in  which  people  participate  un-
dergo change, for people generally adopt the beliefs that support 
actions  needed  to  achieve  goals.  Consequently,  politicization 
would  best  be  achieved  if  people  were  required  to  participate 
more directly and actively in politics--but this process requires a 
drastic  reorganization  of  government,  and  of  the  government-
citizen relationship, which is not likely to happen. 

More  feasible  changes  can  perhaps  be  implemented.  People 
might  begin  to  see  politics  differently  if  reporters  would  cover 
the  actual  rather  than  the  performing  government,  and  if  they 
described it in  terms of the resolution of conflicting interests, re-
lating decisions  to  the  interplay of  interests  and  to  the  perspec-

The  Decision-making  Process 

•  859  • 

tives,  political  positions, and  background characteristics of inter-
est  groups.  Some  reporters  and  columnists  already cover  federal 
politics this way,  although  primarily for  well-educated readers. A 
drastic revision of social  studies and civics courses, particularly at 
the high  school  level,  would also  help,  but students would  learn 
most effectively by doing-by participating in municipal govern-
ment as  interns or administrative aides or undertaking studies of 
local  politics  and  decision-making.  This approach  might also  be 
politically  less  risky  than  classroom  discussion  of  controversial 
topics,  but ultimately,  the  schools  must be pressed  (and enabled) 
to give up the  idea  that education  is  above  politics.  Pluralism  is 
already  being taught,  at least  with  regard  to racial  and  religious 
differences,  but  the  more  crucial  pluralism  of  class  (and  all  its 
cultural and political  implications) is  now discussed onfy in some 
college  sociology  courses,  and  then  only  in  the  more  cosmopol-
itan  universities.  Moreover,  pluralism  is  not  produced  just  by 
teaching  it,  and  unfortunately,  it  seems  to  be  more  acceptable 
with  regard  to  matters  in  which  people  are  less  intensively  in-
volved, such as religious doctrine. 35 

None of these  proposals will  have much  impact, for  the  politi-
cal belief system I  am advocating is  presently held only by profes-
sional  politicians,  whose  activities  require  that  they  think  this 
way.  Ultimately, all  suggestions for improvement require greater 
political participation, and this solution is  illusory.  In an affluent 
society,  people like the Levittowners get what they want from  the 
corporate  economy,  from  a  federal  government  which  subsidizes 
that  economy  for  their  benefit,  and  from  local  governments 
which  they  elect  to  protect  their  residential  status.  Unlike  poor 
people,  who are  increasingly dependent  on government  for  jobs 
and  incomes,  middle  class  people  have  no need  to  participate or 
intervene,  except  on  the  rare  occasions  when  government  de-
prives them of goods,  status, or privileges  they have come to  take 
for granted. 

Some Modest Proposals for  Change 

If "radical"  solutions are often mere dreams  that only uphold 
the  radical  requirement  for  total  change  of  "the  system,"  more 
modest proposals for  improvement may,  however,  have a chance. 
Political communication can be increased in several  ways,  not  to 
eliminate feedback  restriction  or even  to  increase voluntary citi-
zen  feedback  (both  of which  seem  utopian),  but  to  generate  in-

•  360  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

voluntary  feedback  and  to upgrade  its diversity so  that decision-
makers are forced  to notice all  possible viewpoints in the  popula-
tion.  One solution would be  the establishment  of a  civic associa-
tion which,  like  traditional  ones,  allows  people  to air  their opin-
ions  on  important issues,  but which also  solicits  them  through  a 
community  public opinion  poll  that  regularly  reports  the  views 
of a random sample of residents on current issues and new  policy 
proposals.  The poll could be financed  by selling its reports to the 
local  press  and  by  also  doing  special  studies  for  local  organiza-
tions and businesses.  Its operating costs could be reduced by hav-
ing  high  school  students  do  the  research  as  part  of  their  social 
studies courses  (which  would  also  give  th'em  a  useful  and educa-
tional  community  function),  and  whatever  deficits  remained 
could  be  met  from  municipal  subsidies.  The  association  could 
also  publish  its  own  newspaper,  giving a  few  pages  in  each  issue 
to  the  political  parties  to  add  diversity  (albeit  partisan)  to  the 
exchange  of  ideas,  and  allowing  more  citizen  feedback  by  pub-
lishing  letters  of  ideas  and  grievances.88  The  information  vac-
uum created  by  the actual  government and  the resulting rumors 
could be alleviated by a regular column which  publishes the cur-
rent  rumors,  together  with  whatever  facts  are  available  to  sup-
port, reject, or correct them. 

The  proposed  civic  association  can  only  succeed  if  it decides 
from  the  start  to  be  political,  rather  than  "above"  politics.  It 
need not  take  sides,  but it must draw members and officers  from 
all  political  groups,  including  party  factions;  otherwise,  it  will 
become the satellite of a single political group which will then do 
its  utmost  to  exclude  opposition  groups.  The  association  must 
also  obtain  authority,  either  by  force  of  law  or  by  attracting 
widespread  citizen  support,  so  that  decision-makers  will  be  re-
quired to pay attention to its activities and findings. 

Communication from  government to citizens can be improved 
by  increased  press  coverage,  particularly  of  the  actual  govern-
ment,  although  outside  funds  from  foundations  or  the  federal 
government would be needed to hire more and better-trained re-
porters.  The system  of mutual  obligation  between  reporters and 
their sources could be made  less  pervasive  if local  reporters were 
organized  into a  guild,  so  that  politicians who  threaten  to with-
hold news from  particularly inquisitive newsmen could not favor 
more  cooperative ones  from  competing papers.  A  more  effective 
solution  would  be  to  bring  in  outside  reporters  periodically  to 

The  Decision-making  Process 

•  361  • 

cover the local community for a short time. They would function 
like  the  expert  or  the  stranger  who  can  offer  a  fresh  view,  and 
being outsiders,  they would be free  of  the system  of mutual obli-
gation and could not be punished for  their n;portage. To prevent 
local  reporters  from  sabotaging outsiders  for  making  them  look 
incompetent,  the  system  would  have  to  be  reciprocal,  with  two 
communities exchanging reporters. If the local  press is  unwilling 
to  print  the  outsiders'  stories--as  it  well  might  be-they could 
appear  in  the  civic  association  paper  or in  the  press  of a  nearby 
city which is not obligated to local  political institutions. 

But  perhaps  the  best  way  of  improving  both  communication 
and  decision·makers'  responsiveness  would  be  to  enlarge  the 
elected bodies. Three or five  or even nine men cannot adequately 
represent  the  diversity  of  a  typical  community,  particularly  its 
minority elements, and yet less so  when they stand for  re-election 
only  every  second  or  third  year.  If the  municipal  government, 
the school  board, and other public bodies were  manned by  15  to 
20  officials,  the  voters  could  express  their  views  of  government 
operations  more regularly and  more quickly,  and  minority  posi· 
tions  would  receive  more  adequate  representation.  Responsive-
ness would increase further if the heads of all  municipal  agencies 
were also elected, offering their policies for citizen review and en-
abling  candidates  with  alternative  policies  to  compete  for  the 
office.  Even  the  city  manager  and  planner  might  stand  for  elec-
tion,  provided  candidates  who  ran  against  them  were  equally 
qualified  professionals  and  if  their  departments  included  ap-
pointed  technical  directors  to  provide  some  continuity.  Making 
more offices  elective  could result  in more  partisan decisions,  and 
would  eliminate appointed  officials  who are  now  politically  free 
to  pursue  the  public  interest  and  attend  to  minority  demands, 
but  these  costs  are  balanced  by  the  benefit  of  a  more  explicitly 
political  and  representative  government.  Safeguards  to  protect 
the  public  interest  and  minority  needs  would  be  necessary  (see 
Chapter  Fourteen),  as  would  new  incentives  to  recruit  candi-
dates.  Being an elected  official  in a  small  community is  a  thank-
less  task,  for  the  financial  rewards  are  minimal  and  emotional 
ones  are  almost  nonexistent.  Like  actors,  politicians  are  bathed 
by the public spotlight, but unlike actors,  their audiences neither 
pay  nor sit  politely  to  watch  them  perform;  they  come,  instead, 
to demand and complain. As  long as  the politician must reconcile 
conflicting interests,  there  is  no  way  of making his  role  more re-

, 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

spected or satisfying,  although a  higher salary might compensate 
for  its  emotional  burdens and raise  the status of the  office.87 

Citizen  participation could  be  increased  somewhat by  electing 
citizen  advisory committees  to  every municipal  agency,  although 
it might  be difficult  to  recruit  enough  ordinary citizens and pre-
vent domination  by  political  party members.  A  more  feasible  so-
lution,  based  on  the  assumption  that  people  participat~:  only 
when  personal  interests  are  at  stake,  would  be  to adapt  the con-
cept  of  "maximum  feasible  participation"  of  the  antipoverty 
effort  or  the  concept  of  the  civilian  review  board  that  oversees 
the  police  to  the  entire community,  providing  for  the  participa-
tion  or  representation  of  affected  citizens  in  welfare,  public 
health,  recreation,  education,  planning,  and  other  public  agen-
cies.  If students,  as  well  as  more  parents,  participated  in  school 
board  decisions,  public  education  might  not  be  better  by  aca-
demic standards,  but it would  be more responsive  to  their needs. 
Of  course,  it  might  also  deteriorate,  for  parents  and  students 
would  rarely  opt  for  the  public  interest  or  long-range  school 
needs,  and  the  majority  might vote  against  satisfying  the  educa-
tional needs of a minority-but these are the costs of local democ-
racy. 

The decision-making process  and  the qualities of  the decision-
makers are not easily changed, and criticizing their shortcomings 
is  unproductive  because  it  does  not  get  at  the  real  problems. 
They  act  as  they  do  because  they  must  resolve  conflicting  de-
mands,  and  if  they are  poorly  trained,  shortsighted,  uninterested 
in long-range planning, and overly concerned with  their political 
party  and  the  next  election,  they  only  reflect  the  values  of  the 
voters they represent and the political system  in which they must 
function.  Radical  solutions  could  of  course  be  proposed,  either 
an elitist one in which trained experts replace  the elected officials 
or a  pure democracy in which people are somehow encouraged to 
make  their  own  decisions,  but  the  first  is  undesirable  and  the 
second is not feasible. 

A  more  practicable  solution  is  to  recruit  professional  politi-
cians for  the decision-making roles.  Much of what  is  wrong with 
government  in  Levittown  is  that  the  present  incumbents  are 
amateurs  who share  the  voters'  naivete about  the  political  proc-
ess  and  cannot cope  with  the  realities  of  decision-making  when 
they  are  elected.  Believing  in  the  theory  of altruistic  democracy 
even  while defending their own and  their constituents'  interests, 

The  Decision-making  Process 

they  identify  these  with  the  public  interest.  As  a  result,  the 
decision-making  process  becomes  a  debate  among  unself-con-
scious,  well-intentioned,  but  unsophisticated  amateurs  who  be-
have  in  ways  that  they  consider  undesirable  and  undemocratic 
because  they have little choice to do otherwise, and then take out 
their  frustrations  on  the  interveners.  Unable  to  deal  with  the 
emotional  conflict  between  what  they  have  to  do  and  what  they 
think  they  ought  to  do,  they  seal  themselves  off  from  feedback 
more  than  is  necessary,  try  to  stifle  disagreement,  and  cut down 
on the effective democracy that is  possible. 

The  professional  politician,  whether  a  full-time  or  part-time 
practitioner,  sees  decision-making as  a  vocation,  rather  than as  a 
duty and a  cause.  He is  politicized and pluralistic, and can  func-
tion  as  a  broker between  groups.  But the qualities  of  the profes-
sional  have  some  disadvantages  too.  The detachment that breeds 
a  political  other-directedness  which  sensitizes  the  professional  to 
the  conflicting demands  of a  pluralistic  constituency  also  makes 
him less  responsive  to  the problems of the community as  a  whole 
and to long-range needs,  to demands of powerless minorities, and 
indeed,  to  all  issues  in  which  conflicting  pressures  are  absent  or 
irrelevant. In situations where the decision-maker is  free  to act as 
he  sees  fit,  the  morally committed amateur  may come up with  a 
more desirable decision than the professional. 

Moreover,  the  professional  politician  will  probably be no bet-
ter  than  the  amateur  in  decision-making  skill.  Neither  his  role 
nor  his  personality  motivates  him  to  undertake  systematic  anal-
yses  of community problems or to develop policies that deal with 
causes  of  problems.  His  approach  to  policy  is  likely  to  be  even 
more  intuitive  and  unsystematic  than  the  amateur's  and  most 
sensitive  to  the  political  currents  that  flow  around  him  twenty-
four  hours a  day.  The  professional  may also  be  cynical  and  per-
sonally unreliable, making different promises to different people, 
and  telling voters  only what  they  want  to  hear-all  without  ex-
cessive  personal  guilt.  Perhaps  this  is  the  price  of  reaching  de· 
cisions  in  a  heterogenous  community. 

The alternative,  then,  is  between  the committed amateur who 
can-respond best to the wishes of his own group and the detached 
professional  who  can  shape  conflicting  interests  into  a  workable 
compromise.  The  former  is  most  effective  under  conditions  of 
consensus;  the latter, under conditions of conflict.  Since issues on 
which  there  is  consensus  are  rare,  the  drawbacks  of  the  profes-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

sional  politician  are  less  serious  than  the  amateur's.  This choice 
may well  violate  the  faith  of democratic  theory  in  the  ability of 
the disinterested citizen  to  produce democratic government,  but 
then this theory was  itself formulated in reaction against  the  pro-
fessional  politicians who ran  the governments,  parties,  and  polit-
ical  machines  (rural  as  well  as  urban)  of  eighteenth  and  nine-
teenth century Europe and America. 

Nevertheless,  whether  the  decision-maker  is  an  amateur  or 
even an expert, his decisions will  not differ significantly from  the 
professional's,  for  these  are  largely  determined  by  his  political 
role rather than by his personality or training. Significant change 
can take place only if new and different pressures impinge on the 
decision-makers.  Improved  political  communication  will  help, 
and  so  would  more  electoral  offices  and  elected  citizen  advisors, 
but  the  burden  must  fall  largely  on  intervention.  Interveners 
must realize that change is  likely to come about only as a result af 
their efforts to  upset the political equilibrium. 

Intervention  can  be  improved  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Formal 
devices  include more opportunities to hold referenda, giving citi-
zens  the  right  to  introduce  legislation,  and  (in  communities 
larger  than  Levittown)  decentralizing  municipal  functions  and 
powers  so  that  government  becomes  more  accessible  to  the aver-
age  citizen.  Educating  people  about  the  importance  of interven-
tion  and  about  its  most  effective  methods  would  help,  for  ex-
ample,  by  teaching  leaders  the  significance  of  organizing  and 
bringing significant  numbers  of  citizens  to  governmental  meet-
ings instead of relying on moral appeals and angry attacks. And if 
residents  could  be encouraged  to  direct the complaints  they now 
make  largely  to  friends  and  neighbors  to  the  decision-makers 
themselves,  everyday  gripes  would  become  instruments  of  inter-
vention.  Complaint  bureaus  serve  this  function,  but  nothing  is 
more  successful  than  direct  confrontations  with  the  governing 
body.  Interveners  must  also  be  trained  to concentrate  on  intro-
ducing  new  facts  and  ideas  into  the  decision-making  process.  A 
community  opinion  poll  would  isolate  the  distribution  and  di-
versity of views, enabling interveners to show the decision-makers 
when  they  are  not sufficiently  informed about  citizens'  feelings. 
But the most badly needed facts  are on the consequences of al-
ternative  decisions.  Here decision-making is  presently  most defi-
cient,  for neither decision-makers nor interveners make  any  real 
effort  to  catalog  the  consequences,  political  and  nonpolitical, 

The  Decision-making  Process 

long-range and short-range, of alternative decisions. Such a  task is 
probably  too complex  for  either decision-makers  or  interveners. 
They and their community would be helped by an agency which 
systematically  developed  cost-benefit  analyses  for  major  alterna-
tive decisions, even on a rough and imprecise basis. This function 
might be  taken  on  by the civic association  (aided  by high  school 
students  to  carry  on  the  needed  research),  but  a  professional 
agency could do it better, and a  regional one which serviced local 
communities with  such  analyses  would  do  it most  effectively.  In 
theory,  this  task  is  the  proper function  of a  planning agency,  for 
benefit·cost analysis  is  a  major  component  of  the  modern  plan-
ning method. 

More effective  intervention  is  no cure-all,  and the  interveners 
may not succeed  very  often,  but sometimes  the  Davids  do  defeat 
the  Goliaths.  No  one,  not  even  the  decision-makers  themselves, 
knows in advance how much pressure or what new facts and ideas 
may cause  them  to  change  their  minds.  They may  be  impressed 
by an argument or a  show of strength;  they could get an  idea  for 
a  better compromise, and they might help the interveners to gain 
support  from  a  new constituency.  Even  if  the  odds seem  doubt-
ful,  there  is  no other choice  but intervention.  M?st of the  time, 
interveners will lose,  but sometimes they can win, and no one can 
predict when. 

NOTES 

1.  Most Jews  were  Democrats,  but  there  was  no evidence  of  the  ex-
istence  of  a  "Jewish  vote,"  particularly  since  no  issues  arose  to 
generate such  a vote. 

2.  Several  elected  officials  and  party  leaders  earned  their  livings  as 
real  estate  or  insurance  brokers  and,  of  course,  sought  (and  ob-
tained)  municipal  contracts whenever  possible. 

3·  The idea of applying this economic analogy to the political process 
stems from Banfield (1955),  pp. 304-312. See also Downs, and Ban-
field  (1961),  Chap.  11. 

4·  Other studies reporting responsiveness  or convergence of opinion 
between community leaders and residents  are by  Dye  (1963b)  and 
by  Levine  and  Modell.  Divergence  was  reported  by  Sigel  and 
Friesema. 

5·  Forty-two  pe1;  cent were  in favor,  9 per cent were  undecided,  and 
22  per cent  had no opinion.  Republicans  in  the  sample  were  op-
po~ed to  the  name change,  but the  party  was  too  disorganized  to 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

realize  how its members felt  or to  resist  the  builder's pressure  for 
the change.  In  the  1963  referendum  to change  the  name  back  to 
Willingboro,  the  party went along with its  adherents. 

6.  The percentages were 30,  37, and 26;  only 7 per cent had no opin-

ion. 

7·  Fifty-three per cent opposed the sate of liquor, 33  per cent favored 

it,  and  14 per cent had no opinion. 

8.  Thirty-four per cent were for lowering it, 20  per cent were against, 

and 46  per cent had no opinion. 

g.  Dux.  The  tabulation  combined  those  favoring  no  change  and 

voicing  no opinion. 

10.  See  also  Dahl, p.  101. 
11.  Crozier,  pp.  235-236. 
12.  The term is taken from  Banfield (1961),  p.  241. 
13.  Exaggeration  can-and  often  does-develop  unintentionally  in 

the  heat  of  political  battle. 

14.  After  C.A.P.S.  met  with  the  school  board,  its  members  were  in-
vited  to help  the school  staff  by  doing research-the former  hop-
ing that the proper facts would result in a change of school policy, 
the  latter intending  to  keep  them  busy  so  that  they  would  stop 
questioning  the  school  board  policy.  In  the  end,  neither  group 
achieved  its  aim. 

15.  It is  also  affected  by  the  other  sources  of  available  feedback,  for 
the kindergarten entry age issue showed  that the less  the decision-
makers  know  about  how  the  community  feels,  the  smaller  the 
number of interveners needed. 

16.  The  nature  of  cosmopolitan  participation  in  local  communities 
is  described  in  detail by  Merton  (1957).  See  also  Dobriner  (1958) 
and Dye (1963a). 

17.  In  older  suburbs  they  are  frequently  newcomers.  Merton  (1957), 

p.  400,  Dobriner  (1958),  pp.  138-139. 

18.  See  Gans (1953). 
19.  See also Merton (1957),  pp. 399, 402-406. 
20.  In  the  analysis  that  follows,  I  treat  the  cosmopolitan  group  as 
more  cohesive  than  it actually  is,  and  neglect  some  of  the  differ-
ences of opinion among individuals. 

21.  These  principles  were  also  a  source  of  cultural  differentiation 
which  allowed  them  to  maintain  their  status  position.  For  ex-
ample,  their  belief  that  they  were  more  civic-minded  than  other 
Levittowners enabled them to retain their sense of personal worth, 
and  the  hostility  they  generated  as  a  result  allowed  them  to  feel 
that they were of higher status, regardless of how much they were 
scorned  for  advocating  "Brookline  values." 

22.  Of course,  in some  cases,  the  decision-makers  were  just checking 
to find  out where  the cosmopolitans stood on  an issue so  that the 
latter could be more easily neutralized when  they  began  to  inter-
vene  publicly. 

The  Decision-making  Process 

23.  Even  the President of the United States has limited ability  to per-
suade the government to bend to his wishes.  See, e.g.,  Sorenson. 
24.  An  expert  may  also  be  hired  by  decision-makers  to  legitimate  a 
decision  they have  already reached  and  by interveners  to  support 
their  demands  with  facts  and  expertise.  Under  these  conditions, 
he functions  as  a  resource  person;  he  is  an  intervener  only  if he 
comes  with an  opportunity  to make  or change  a  decision  that di-
verts  the  actual  government  from  its  routine  path,  regardless  of 
who sponsors him. 

25.  When  he is  willing  to  conform  to working class  values,  however, 
his  advice  may  be  accepted.  For  example,  a  Levittown  working 
class  politician  who  opposed  the  city  manager,  because  he  ex-
pected him to  eliminate patronage jobs usually  taken  by  working 
class  constituents,  was  quick  to  call  in  an  expert  to  set  up  the 
fire  company  he  had  organized. 

26.  See also  Dahl's distinction  between  "legitimists" and "dissenters," 

pp.  323-324-

27- For a  comparison  of decision-maker  and citizen  views  of  the sub-

urban  political  process, see  Dye  (1962). 

28.  This theory is argued by Hunter, and by Mills. 
29.  Among its  many advocates  are  Dahl,  and Banfield  (1961). 
30.  See,  e.g.,  Goodman  (1965).  His school  proposals  are  described  in 

Goodman (1964). 

31.  A  more  detailed  discussion,  set  off  by  a  debate  about  the schools 
of  Levittown,  is  to  be  found  in  Goodman  (1961),  and  in  my  re-
sponse  in  the  "Letters" section  of Commentary,  Vol.  32  (Novem-
ber 1961),  pp. 436-437. 

32.  See,  e.g., Vallier. 
33·  Friedenberg,  pp.  138-140. 
34·  Levittown's  social  studies  courses  emphasized  the  Indians  who 
once  lived  in  the  area  more  than  current  problems  in  the  com-
munity. They also dealt  as  much  with  the  history  and geography 
of foreign  countries as  with  American  society. 

35·  For  example,  working  class  people,  who  are  usually  little  inter-
ested in civic affairs, view society more relativistically as composed 
of people "all  trying to get their own," as one Levittowner put it, 
and  deceive  themselves  less  than  middle  class  people  about  the 
possibilities  of  altruistic  democracy.  A  number  of  studies  have 
shown  that  cynicism  is  lower  among  the  affluent  and  well  edu-
cated.  Milbrath,  p.  So. 

36.  Such  a  newspaper  could  also  be  subsidized  by  the  community. 
A  community  radio  program  in  which  listeners  could  call  up  to 
voice  their ideas and complaints would also be useful. Such a  pro-
gram has  been on the air in  Levittown,  Pennsylvania, for years. 
37·  Higher salaries might  also  increase  citizens'  resentment,  for,  lack-
ing understanding of the  politicians'  functions,  people do not see 
how they "earn" the low salaries they now get. 

Chapter Four teen 

POLITICS  AND  PLANNING 

D 

D 

D 

D 

THE  PROPOSALS  MADE  IN  THE  PRECEDING  CHAPTER  FOR  IMPROVING 
the decision-making process  would not change  it significantly;  it 
would still be  political and would most often result  in "popular" 
decisions. Since such decisions may lead to tyranny of the majority 
and  neglect  of  the  public  interest,  one  must  ask  whether  non-
political  decision-making  processes  and  "unpopular"  decisions 
are  possible  in  a  political  system  like  Levittown's,  and  under 
what conditions they are desirable.  In order to answer these ques-
tions,  it  is  useful  to  begin  with  a  brief  evaluation  of  decisions 
reached  by political means. 

POLITICAL  AND  NONPOLITICAL  DECISION-MAKING 

Among  the  politically  reached decisions  during  the  tim~ of  my 
study  were:  the  sale  of  liquor,  the  admission  of  nonresident 
doctors,  the  kindergarten  entry age,  the  tax  rate,  and  "the juve-
nile problem."  The liquor decision was,  in my opinion,  handled 
poorly, for  the decision-makers arbitrarily rejected majority opin-
ion,  although  the  citizens  were  able  to  overturn  them  because 
New Jersey law permits referenda on this issue.  The "wets" were 
not  really  inconvenienced,  however;  they  only  had  to  go  to  the 
next  township  to  find  package  stores  and  taverns.  The nonresi-
dent doctor issue  was  resolved more adequately,  for  the citizenry 
seemed to be ambivalent, and the decision-makers reached a com-
promise,  permitting  some  nonresident  doctors  (including  the 
specialists  who  would  otherwise  not  have  come),  yet  without 

•  368 

• 

Politics  and  Planning 

creating commercial enclaves in residential areas and thus threat-
ening  those  fearing  a  reduction  in  property  values  and  status. 
The  kindergarten  controversy  was  also  resolved  adequately,  for 
people who wanted  to  keep  their  children  home as  long  as  pos-
sible were satisfied,  but so was the minority, which was eventually 
able  to  enroll  children  earlier  through  a  voluntary  testing  pro-
gram. 

The  several  tax  rate  decisions  were  handled  poorly;  but  I 
doubt  whether  the decision-makers  had  any  other choice.  They 
raised taxes because they had to,  but as  little as  possible to satisfy 
the  antitax majority.  Their decision-making process  was  erratic, 
but  then  the  intensity  of  majority  feelings  varied  from  year  to 
year, and so  did the intervention of  the minority favoring  higher 
municipal  budgets.  Although  the  initial  popular  opposition  to 
taxes stemmed primarily from the precipitous increase in  the tax 
rate brought about by the builder's withdrawal of subsidies to  the 
school  budget,  the  fact  remains  that  he  provided  considerable 
sums  to  keep  taxes  low  in the  first  two years.  After the  tax  rate 
stabilized at the higher level,  popular opposition decreased some-
what,  but principally because  the  decision-makers  knew  that the 
voters would not tolerate further tax hikes. The .community's tax 
base  was  simply  insufficient  to  raise  the  level  of  municipal  ser-
vices (particularly of schools)  to minority demands and still  keep 
the majority of voters happy. 

As  a  byproduct  of  the  tax  debate,  the majority got  the  lower 
middle class  schooling  it wanted for  its children,  but the cosmo-
politans were deprived.  Since  the  ideal  solution,  satisfying  both 
majority and minority,  was  impossible,  one cannot quarrel  with 
the final  solution. It seems wrong to argue,  as did  the cosmopoli-
tans,  that all children should be exposed to an upper middle class 
education.  Parents  have  the  right  to  socialize  their  children  in 
their  own  class,  provided  some  alternatives  are  available  for  the 
mobile  (both  upward  and  downward).  Without  an  intensive 
study  of  the  Levittown  schools,  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether 
they  provided  enough  educational  diversity  (for  both  upper 
middle  and  working  class  aspirations).  However  desirable,  such 
diversity is difficult to establish in a small community and hard to 
finance when the majority of voters want lower taxes. 

Possibly, the lower middle class school system which the major-
ity wanted for  its children was  not good enough  by  its standards 
either,  particularly  for  career  preparation.  It  seemed  good 

•  370  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNElU 

enough for  now,  for  its graduates entered lower middle class col-
leges,  and  would  eventually  qualify  for  the  technical  and  other 
white collar jobs  they wanted  in order to  finance  the lower mid-
dle class life styles for which they had been raised. Whether or not 
their education was good enough to train them sufficiently for an 
automating  economy  with  radically  altered  job  opportunities  is 
hard  to  say.  No  one  knows  today  what  jobs  will  be  available  in 
the  future  or whether  the  youngsters  now sitting  in Levittown's 
classrooms are learning enough to qualify for those jobs. Since no 
one could prove that the  school  system  was  clearly inadequate by 
this  criterion,  one  need  not  be  surprised  that  neither  decision-
makers  nor  parents  were  willing  to  change  the  system-even  if 
they  had  known  how  to do it. 

The  "juvenile problem"  was  handled most  poorly of all.  The 
final decision-to do nothing-was popular, of course; not enough 
voters  wanted  adolescent facilities,  citizen  intervention was  min-
imal,  no  expert  interveners were  brought  in  to  testify  to  adoles-
cent  needs,  and  the decision-makers  acted  accordingly.  Even  so, 
the  means  proposed  to  achieve  the  popular  goal  of reducing de-
linquency were irrational.  No one distinguished between serious 
delinquency and  vandalism,  and no one sought  to  find  out how 
the  latter  could  be  eliminated.  Neither  the  Juvenile  Discussion 
Group,  which  asked  voluntary associations  to sponsor adolescent 
recreation  activities,  nor  the  Youth  Commission,  which  set  up a 
Teenage Panel  to punish  the  vandals who were caught, ever con· 
sidered  the  needs of the  teenagers  or  looked  into  ways  of giving 
them  a  social  function  in  the  community~ The  final  solution,  a 
patchwork  of voluntary but adult-run activities and  more  police 
supervision,  did  not  attack  the  basic  causes  of  the problem  and 
was  inadequate,  because  something  could  have  been  done  to 
satisfy  both  adults  and  adolescents.  Teenage  gathering  places 
could  have  been  provided  away  from  residential  and  shopping 
areas,  and  the  teenagers could have established their own center, 
much  as  working  class  adults  built  themselves  a  firehouse  with 
private  fund-raising  and  their  own  labor.  The  primary  obstacle 
was  not  cost,  but  adult  fears,  which  might  well  have  been  re-
duced  if  adults  and  adolescents  had  sat  down  together.  The 
decision-making  process  was  inadequate and  undemocratic,  how-
ever, for the adolescents were not represented and could not even 
intervene  to  state  their  demands  or  apprise  adults  of  their  feel-
ings, 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  371 

• 

A  comparison  of  the  five  issues  shows  that  political  decisions 
can  be  both  good and  bad,  and  my  cursory  evaluation  suggests 
some  criteria  for  judging them.  They must  respond  first  to  ma-
jority demands,  but  the  more  they  can  also  satisfy  minority  de-
mands, the better.  Often,  they can also be rational without polit-
ical  ill effects;  they  ought  to address  themselves  to  the  causes  of 
problems,  and  unless  popular demand  for  irrational  solutions  is 
politically  overpowering,  experts  can  be  used  to  bring solutions 
as  close  to rationality as  possible. 1  Minorities  have  to rely  on in-
tervention, but it must be effective,  so  that  the minority's  power 
is  expressed to the fullest.  It can also be rational, using experts to 
expose  majority  irrationality  and  to  propose  compromises  that 
would  optimize  benefits  on  both  sides.  Above  all,  the  decision-
making process must be representative;  the people affected by an 
issue must have  the opportunity to state  their demands and exert 
political pressure.  They may not be successful,  but if they are ex-
cluded  from  the  start,  as  the  adolescents  were,  the  decision-
making process is not even properly political. 

Nonpolitical  decision-making processes  rely  principally on ex-
pertise  and  systematic  planning  to  come  up  with  decisions  that 
may not please or interest the majority. In order to consider how 
they can be effective in a  political system that caters to the major-
ity,  I  want to resort again to case studies, analyzing two such pro-
cesses in some detail. 

THE  RACIAL  DESEGREGATION  OF  LEVITTOWN 2 

Levittown's  desegregation  was  accomplished  through  nonpoliti-
cal  means,  enforcing  a  decision  made  outside  the  community, 
and,  like  most  nonpolitical  decisions,  it was  not  favored  by  the 
community's  majority.  Even  so,  effective  expertise  and  rational 
planning  produced  an  outcome  that guaranteed  minority rights 
without harming the majority, and indeed, even pleased the peo-
ple who had been opposed to integration. 

The question of desegregating  Levittown  came  up before any 
purchasers had arrived, and was  raised  by the builder himself. In 
spring  1958,  at a  press  conference  to  publicize  the  imminent be-
ginning  of  the  new  community,  William  Levitt  permitted  him-
self  to be questioned by reporters.  They knew  that  the firm  had 
not  previously  sold  to  Negroes;  that  Levittown,  Pennsylvania, 
had  experienced  a  racial  disturbance  when  a  Negro  family 

•  372  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

bought a  house  from  a  white  Levittowner;  and  that  New Jersey 
law  made  it  illegal  to  practice  discrimination  in  housing  sup-
ported  by  federal  subsidies.  Nevertheless,  Levitt  declared  pub-
licly that he would not sell  to Negroes in Levittown,  New Jersey. 
Reactions  were  not long  in  coming.  Senator  Case  requested  the 
Federal  Housing  Administration  (FHA)  to  refuse  mortgage  in-
surance to  Levittown; Governor Meyner was asked to enforce the 
state  law,  and  set  the  State  Division  Against  Discrimination 
to  work;  and  a  Burlington  County  Quaker  group 
(SDAD) 
picketed  the  model  homes  on opening day  and for  the next few 
weeks.  Soon  afterwards,  two  Negroes  who  had  not been allowed 
to  buy  brought  suit  against  Levitt  in  the  state  courts,  arguing 
that  the  availability  of  FHA  mortgage  insurance  for  Levitt 
houses constituted government support. 

The  Levitt  decision  had  not  been  easy.  The  firm  was  under 
pressure  from  the  national  Jewish  community  to  integrate,  and 
Levitt  had  even  made vague  promises  to  pro-integration  groups 
to  admit Negroes after the first  neighborhoods  had  been settled. 
Skeptics thought these promises were intended to reduce pressure 
on  Levittown,  Pennsylvania,  where  the  firm  was  then  having 
trouble selling the last of its houses.  In any case,  the firm  decided 
that the first  priority was economic, and  that immediate integra-
tion  of  the  new  Levittown  would  hurt  sales  to  whites.  Bressler 
writes:  "In defending his  policy  of  racial  exclusion,  Levitt  had 
often had occasion to assert that both as a Jew and a humane man 
he sympathized with the  plight of struggling minorities, but that 
economic  realities  reluctantly,  compelled  him  to  recognize  that 
'most  whites  prefer  not  to  live  in  mixed  communities  .  .  .  the 
responsibility  for  this  is  society's  . . .  it  is  not  reasonable  to 
expect that any one builder could or should undertake to absorb 
the entire risk and burden of conducting such  a  vast social  expe-
riment.'" 8  One of the Levitt executives put the firm's position to 
me  this way:  "Our firm  is  liberal  and  progressive,  but we  don't 
want to  be singled out or used as  the firm  which should start the 
other builders off.  If there is  no other builder who can keep Ne-
groes out, we  will  not do so  either;  we  will  go  with  the group if 
the  state makes  us,  but we  don't want  to  lose  millions by  being 
the first  .  .  .  we could not afford to take such losses.'' 

Although the Levitt family  had not been very active  in behalf 
of  minorities-many  years  earlier  the  firm  discouraged  Jews 
from  an  expensive  housing development on  Long Island-there 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  373  • 

was some justification for the charge that they were being singled 
out.  SDAD  and  pro-integration  groups  were  concentrating  on 
Levittown  because  it  was  by  far  the  largest  new  suburb  in  the 
state  and  because  they  felt  that  if  Levitt  would  integrate,  other 
builders  would  follow  suit.•  Presumably,  being  the  biggest 
builder in  the  East,  he  could pay  the  costs  of  integration-if in-
deed  there  were  any-more  easily  than smaller ones.  Moreover, 
Levittown  had  become  a  national  symbol  of  suburbia  and  a 
brand name  in  housing generally, so  that  the  publicity  value  of 
its integration would be considerable. One could even argue that 
the  firm  had  attracted  more  purchasers  and  profit  because  its 
communities had become  national symbols,  and that it therefore 
deserved being singled out. Even so,  the builder felt he had been 
picked on unjustly. 

As  a  result,  Levitt decided to fight  the suit brought by the two 
Negro applicants, arguing that FHA mortgage insurance did not 
constitute  government  support  of  housing,  but  represented  a 
contract between the FHA and the individual buyer.  Meanwhile, 
Levitt  salesmen  assured  prospective  white  buyers  that,  "It's  all 
politics;  the  other  Levittowns  are  all  white  and  this  one  will 
be  too."  In some  instances  the  "politics" was  attributed to Com-
munists,  in  others,  to  politicians  campaigning  for  votes  in  the 
Negro slums of Newark and Jersey City. 

The suit against  Levitt dragged  on  inconclusively for  most  of 
1959,  without  causing  much  overt  concern  among  potential 
buyers  or  residents.  Participant-observation  data  and  my  at· 
tempts  to start conversations on  t,he  topic suggest  that the major-
ity  of  Levittowners  were  uncomfortably  ambivalent  about  the 
issue.  Some  were  hostile  and  threatened  to  move  or  to  protest 
violently.  These  were  primarily  working  class  people  who  had 
left  the city  because  their neighborhood  was  becoming  predom-
inantly  Negro.a  Unable  to  afford  another  move,  they  were  fear-
ful  that  the  same  mass  invasion  of  lower  class  Negroes  would 
occur in Levittown,  confronting them with a  sudden and visible 
decline  in  property values  and status.  Having just achieved  sub-
urban home ownership, and being at the top of  the working class 
socially  and  occupationally,  they  sensed  that  such  an  invasion 
could only pull down their prestige. A smaller group (mainly the 
cosmopolitans)  was  very  much  in  favor  of  desegregation  and 
many of  them  became  active  in  the  Burlington  County  Human 
Relations  Council.  Principally  Jews,  Quakers,  and  Unitarians, 

•  374  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

some had been active in integration efforts in former residences. 6 
The majority of Levittowners stood between these poles. An atti-
tude survey would  probably have shown  that  they did not favor 
desegregation,  but also  believed  Negroes  had  a  right  to  live  in 
Levittown. 7  They too feared a lower class  invasion, but were able 
to  distinguish  between  middle  class  Negroes,  "those  who  are 
more  like  us,"  and  slum  dwellers,  common  sense  telling  them 
that the latter could not afford to buy in Levittown. Some feared 
intermarriage.  Seeming  to  believe  that  once  Negroes  moved  in, 
they would be integrated socially, white parents were afraid their 
daughters would date Negro boys.8 

Despite the fears,  integration received little attention through-
out  1959.  Minority  factions  in  two  organizations  unsuccessfully 
proposed  by-laws  to  exclude  Negroes,  dissatisfied  buyers  joked 
about  revenging  themselves  on  Levitt  (or  their  neighbors)  by 
selling to  Negroes,  and there was a  brief panic one Sunday when 
a  group of Negroes came  to look at an empty house,  until  it was 
learned  that  they  were  there  to clean  it for  a  new  white  buyer. 
Meanwhile,  some  Negro  maids  had  been  living  "in"  without 
adverse  comment,  and  others came  into  town  daily  as  part-time 
domestics. But then, they were clearly servants and threatened no 
one's status. 

When  the  Appellate  Court  ruled  late  in  1959  that  the  State 
Division  Against  Discrimination  could  hold  public  hearings  on 
the case,  Levitt went  to  the state  Supreme Court.  Knowing  that 
once  public  hearings were  held he would probably be judged in 
violation of the state antidiscrimination law and forced  to deseg-
regate,  he promised  that if the Supreme Court upheld the lower 
court,  he  would  desegregate  without  further  delay,  even  before 
public  hearings.  The  firm's  decision  was  based  on  its  long-
standing  belief  that all  but  the  most  favorable  publicity  about 
Levittown should  be  discouraged,  and  that,  in  this  instance,  the 
publicity  from  the  public  hearings  could  only  scare  away  more 
white  buyers.  Meanwhile,  Levitt  had  attempted  to  obtain  post-
ponements  from  the  lower  courts,  hoping  to  sell  an  all-white 
community  to  as  many  people  as  possible  before  a  higher court 
finally ruled for integration.' 

In  March  196o,  the  state  Supreme Court issued  a  stay  on  the 
case  until  April,  but  toward  the  end  of  March  ministers  and 
township officials were summoned to a  number of conferences at 
the Levitt office building. On Sunday, March 29,  all the ministers 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  375  • 

announced during church services that the Court stay would end 
April  15,  and  that  even  if  it  were  prolonged  while  the  builder 
took  the  case  to  the  U.S.  Supreme Court,  desegTegation  was  in-
evitable.10  Consequently,  the builder had decided  to desegregate 
voluntarily  and  asked  the  community  to  prepare  itself  to  wel-
come  Negro residents.  The decision  was  accepted quietly,  partly 
because  it came  from  the  ministers,  partly  because  the  commu-
nity  had  accepted  the  inevitability  of  integration.  Moreover, 
people knew  that it would  not  take place in their own neighbor-
hoods,  but  in  the  new  one  under  construction.  Also,  the  an-
nouncement stressed the desirability of peaceful integration-and 
as it turned out, Levittowners favored peace and order even more 
than segregation. 

The  desire  for  order  was  a  direct  outcome  of  the  racial  dis-
turbance in the Pennsylvania Levittown. On its arrival  there,  the 
Negro family was  met by a  milling  crowd of about five  hundred 
angry people, and when the local  police was  unable or unwilling 
to restore order,  the state police had to be summoned. Although 
there was  no violence and only  two stones  were  thrown,  the dis-
turbance was  thereaftel' described as a stone-throwing riot, giving 
the  older  Levittown  a  worldwide  reputation  as  a  riot-torn  com-
munity and  placing a  blot  on  its  escutcheon  which  the  residents 
of the newest one wanted desperately  to avoid.U  In fact,  in later 
years,  people  distinguished  the older  Levittown  from  their  own 
as  "the  one  that  had  the  riot."  The  Levitt  organization  also 
wanted  to  avoid  another  disturbance,  fearful  that  a  riot  would 
hurt  sales  more  than  desegregation  itself.  Believing  that  the 
Pennsylvania  disturbance  had  been  caused  by  the  surreptitious-
ness  of  Negro  purchase,  it  sought  to  make  sure  that  the  New 
Jersey community would be desegregated  publicly, and therefore 
set in motion a planning program to achieve this aim. 

Planning  for  Desegregation 

The  builder's  first  step  in  planning  the  desegregation  process 
was  to  hire  an  expert  consultant,  a  recently  retired  director  of 
SDAD.  Given a  free  hand  by  the  firm,  he developed a  five-point 
program:  the  announcement  of  the  Levitt  decision  by  commu-
nity  leaders;  a  thorough  briefing  program  for  the  Levitt  sales 
force,  government  officials,  the  police,  and  the press;  an attempt 
to  discourage  anti-integration  activities,  informally  called  "Op-
eration  Hothead";  the  formation  of  a  community  Human  Rela-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

tions Council;  and careful screening of the first  Negro applicants 
to make sure that they would be middle class people. 12 

The township governing  body was  initially asked  to  announce 
the  Levitt decision, but its  members were  not especially eager  to 
do so.  Some were personally opposed to integration, but all feared 
association with  the decision  would hurt them politically,  partic-
ularly  since  neither  party  would  take  a  stand. 18  The  ministers 
then  volunteered  to  make  the  announcement.  Most  favored  in-
tegration, and several  knew  that like-minded colleagues in  Levit-
town,  Pennsylvania,  had  been  forced  out  of  their  pulpits  over 
this  issue.  If they  made  the  announcement  in  unison,  no  con-
gregation  could  condemn  its  own  minister,  and  no  individual 
minister could invite anti-integrationists to  his  church to  exploit 
the  then  lively competition  for  congregants. 14  The more  fervent 
pro-integration  ministers  took  leadership  positions  on  the  Hu-
man  Relations  Council,  organized  at  the  same  time,  and  also 
placed some of their lay supporters on it. 13 

The  police  briefing  stressed  methods  to  ensure  the  peaceful 
settling of the  first  Negro  purchasers,  to  head off anti-integration 
demonstrations, and  to prevent the  police  laxity that had existed 
in  the older Levittown. Although the force  was  not especially en-
thusiastic  about  desegregation,  the  police chief was  vitally  inter-
ested  in  making  his  department  the  best  in  Burlington County. 
Since  a  riot would have left a  permanent mark on his  record,  he 
cooperated completely. The press  briefing was  also influenced  by 
events  in  the  older  Levittown.  Several  papers  in  the  Levittown, 
Pennsylvania,  area  had  played  up  the  integration  issue  and  had 
reported  the  address  and  arrival  time  of  the  first  Negro  buyer, 
thus  facilitating  crowd  formation  for  the disturbance.  In  Levit-
town,  New Jersey,  the newspapers agreed  to limit their coverage, 
and  eventually reported  only  the signing of the deed by  the  first 
Negro family.  Press cooperation was  easy  to obtain;  the publisher 
of the local daily also owned the erring Pennsylvania one and was 
eager  to  make  amends.  The Levittown  editor of  the  Burlington 
County weekly,  having seen  the  disturbance  in  the  older  Levit-
town  at  first  hand,  helped  brief  his  colleagues  and  advised  the 
consultant in other ways. 

"Operation  Hothead" was  organized  by  the consultant;  aided 
by  ministers,  reporters,  and  others  who  knew  the  community 
well,  he  made up a  list  of known militant segregationists.  These 
were  then  lectured  sternly  by  their  respective  ministers  and 

Politics  and  Planning 

firmly discouraged from  organizing anti-integration protest.  The 
screening of Negro applicants sought middle class  people able to 
withstand  the  hostility and  isolation  that might come  their way. 
Although this process reassured the builder and local leaders that 
Levittown  would  not  be  invaded  by  poor  Negroes,  the commu-
nity  was  never  told  about  it.  Screening  was  abolished  after  the 
first  Negroes  had  moved  in,  and  the  unscreened  purchasers  who 
came later were quite like the screened ones. 

The  inte!,'Tation  process  was  also  aided  by  the  plan  by  which 
Negroes  chose  their  homes.  The  builder  and  his  consultant 
agreed  that  Negroes  should  be scattered  around  the  community 
(if  possible,  only  one  per  block),  and  that  under  no  circum-
stances  should  two  Negroes  be  permitted  to  buy  adjoining 
houses.  This  prevented  anyone  from  imagining  that  gro_ups  of 
Negroes  were  invading  the  community  or  that  a  Negro  subsec-
tion  might develop,  and  made  it  impossible  for  white  buyers  to 
ask  to be located in an all-white section,  thus facilitating the task 
of the sales force in implementing integration. 

Needless  to  say,  the  sales  force  was  briefed  intensively.  Every 
salesman  was  instructed  that,  "At no  time would  he,  directly,  or 
indirectly, raise  the issue of race;  that when questioned by a pros-
pect  he  would  react  without  evasion,  defense,  or  apology  but 
with  a  manner  that  suggested  to  the  questioner  that  the  matter 
was  not of  specific  concern  to  him  or  the  firm."  18  A  deliberate 
decision  not to attempt to convert  the salesmen  to a  personal  be-
lief  in  integration  and  a  two-week  research  program,  which 
showed  that  few  prospective  white  purchasers  brought  up  the 
race  issue,  seems  to  have  altered  the  behavior of  the  sales  force 
quickly and quietlyP 

Although  many  whites  were  willing  to  live  in  an  integrated 
Levittown,  some  were  hesitant  about  buying  next  to  a  Negro 
family.  To  overcome  this  problem,  the  Levitt  organization  de-
veloped an  ingenious system  for  choosing lots,  giving first  choice 
in each  neighborhood and  its  subsections  to  Negroes.  Like other 
purchasers,  they naturally preferred a private lot, one backing up 
on  woods,  creeks,  or  open  space  rather  than  on  other  houses. 
Consequently,  Negroes  automatically  located  themselves  at  the 
edge  of  neighborhoods,  where  they  would  be  adjacent  to  fewer 
white  purchasers  than  they would  have  been  in  the middle,  and 
where  they  might be less  visible  to  hostile  whites.  It also  forced 
whites who chose lots after them to decide whether they wanted a 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

private lot  next  to  a  Negro  family,  or a  less  desirable one  in all-
white  company. 18  If a  white  purchaser  chose  a  lot  adjacent  to 
one selected  by a  Negro  family,  he was  told so  and given  the op-
tion  of  changing  to  another  lot.  Most  white  buyers  preferred 
privacy with  Negro neighbors to interior lots, .and even when the 
few  "private"  lots  were  gone,  only  about  20  per  cent  who  had 
chosen  next  to  a  Negro  picked  another  lot. 10  As  a  result,  few 
houses adjacent to Negro-owned ones remained unsold. 20 

The large  majority of  Levittowners were  not affected  by these 
aspects  of  the  desegregation  process;  they  were  to  be  involved 
through  the  Human  Relations  Council,  which  made  plans  to 
publish  pamphlets,  visit  concerned  white  and  Negro  residents, 
and  hold  school  programs  and  community  workshops  on  in-
tegration.  Of  these,  only  the  workshop  materialized,  for  by  the 
time  the  Council  began  to  meet  regularly,  the  first  four  Negro 
families  had  moved  in without incident,  and Levitt felt  that  fur-
ther Council  activities  would  only draw  undue  publicity  toward 
the  presence  of  Negroes  in  Levittown.  The workshop  was  to  be 
attended  by  representatives  from  every  voluntary  association  in 
town,  but drew more from  those favoring  integration. The work-
shop  program  consisted  of  lectures  by  outside  name  experts, 
which  were  unsuccessful  because  they  assumed  the  Levittowners 
were prejudiced and demanded a change in attitude;  and of post-
lecture  "buzz  groups,"  which  were  quite  successful,  because 
people saw  their neighbors  had similar doubts about integration 
and were  thus able  to  talk  freely  about  the  problems  that really 
concerned  them-property values and intermarriage. The discus-
sions did not convert anyone  to  integration, but the provision of 
new facts in the right setting stilled some fears. 21 

The arrival  of  the first  Negro purchaser in June, just after the 
final  session  of  the  Workshop,  proceeded  quietly,  uneventfully, 
and almost unnoticed.  The family was  personally welcomed  by a 
Levitt  vice-president  and  even  by  the  Mayor  (but  without  pub-
licity).  A .brief  flurry  of  concern  arose  when  a  milk  salesman 
tried  to  organize  a  boycott  against  the  company serving the  Ne-
gro  family,  but a  call  from  the  Human  Relations Council  to  his 
employer  put  an  end  to  the  matter.  A  week  later,  some  pro-
integration  residents,  believing  that  in  the  other  Levittowns  no 
Negro  had  ever  dared  enter  the  pool,  made  elaborate  plans  to 
take the family swimming,  but this turned out to be unnecessary, 
for  the  day  before,  the  children  next  door  had  casually  taken 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  379  • 

their new neighbors with them to the pool. Other families moved 
in  equally  quietly,  and  by  the  time  the  fifth  one  had  arrived, 
even those who followed  integration closely no longer kept track 
of the newcomers.  As  of  1964,  the number of Negro families  was 
estimated at around 50,  more  than  in  the  two  other  Levittowns 
combined, but no one knew-or seemed to care-about the exact 
number. 

The  integration  of  Negro  residents  into  community life  also 
proceeded  without  incident,  although  slowly.  They  were  wel-
comed  as  church  members  in  their  own  denominations;  indi-
vidual Negroes became active in a  number of organizations, such 
as  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  the  Democratic  party,  but 
membership  in  more  explicitly  social  organizations  was  rarer. 
Neighbor  relationships  between  whites  and  Negroes  were  cor-
dial,  but  there  was  little  sociability across  racial  lines.  Only  Ne-
gro  cosmopolitans  found  the  relaxed  and  intensive  sociability 
that  spells  real  integration,  for  the  white  cosmopolitans,  them-
selves  an  isolated minority in  the community,  incorporated them 
into their organizational and social activities. 

Shortly after my  fieldwork  was  concluded  in  1961,  two  Negro 
families  purchased houses  in  one of the  all-white  neighborhoods 
settled before integration. The resales were made privately,  with-
out any  involvement  by  either  human  relations  agencies  or  real 
estate  brokers,  and  they  too  took  place  without  incident,  al-
though  not without  some  tension.  The real  estate agencies  were 
in  fact  the  only  group  to  discriminate  openly,  refusing  to  show 
houses  for  resale  to ·Negro buyers.  Competition between  brokers 
was  intense,  and  they  figured  that  whites  might  not  give  their 
house  for  sale  to  brokers  who  had  previously  sold  to  Negroes. 
And  they knew  that white customers would outnumber Negroes 
for  a  long  time  to  come.  Most  whites  who  got  along  well  with 
their neighbors were reluctant to sell  to Negroes if the neighbors 
opposed it, and giving the house to a real estate agency which did 
not  discriminate  might  a~ger  the  neighbors. 22  Some  Levit-
towners  were  not  yet  ready  to  live  next  door  to  a  Negro,  and 
others were afraid that  they would have difficulty selling a  house 
in  the  extremely  soft  resale  market  if  the  adjacent  house  was 
Negro-occupied.  The real  estate salesmen  therefore considered it 
good business to deal only with whites. 23 

All  things  considered,  the  desegregation  of  Levittown  turned 
out to be successful. True, only a  relative handful of Negroes did 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

buy.  The  vast  majority  could  not  afford  even  the  inexpensive 
Levitt  house,  and  some  of  those  who  could  were  not  yet  emo-
tionally  ready  to  move  into  what  was  still  a  99  per  cent  white 
community.  The county  Human  Relations  Council  always  had 
more  difficulty  in  finding  Negro  buyers  than  white  sellers.  The 
only  one  for  whom  integration  was  not  a  clear  success  was  the 
builder.  Even  before  integTation,  sales  had  begun  to  slow down, 
and  the  drop-off  continued  afterwards.  What  portion  of  the  re-
duction  resulted  from  integration  is  difficult  to  establish.  If one 
compares  the  number of  move-ins  just before  and after  integra-
tion,  there  is  no  indication  of  any  direct  and  immediate  rela-
tionship.24  Sales  did drop sharply in the  years  that followed,  but 
the drop occurred during a  period when the area housing market 
had  become  saturated  and  county  employment  had  been  re-
duced.25 

Although  Levitt  officials  felt  that  integration  had  made  it 
difhcult  to  attract  Philadelphians  who  were  themselves  escaping 
racial  change  in  the city,  and attributed  20  per cent of the sales 
decline  to  integration,  I  suspect  that  this  estimate  is  too  high.26 
Levitt's publicity policy did not help either, for  the Philadelphia 
area  was  never  told  that  integration  had  been  peaceful  and  had 
attracted  only  a  handful  of  middle  class  Negroes.  If would-be 
buyers  thought  Levittown was  overrun with  lower class  Negroes 
or  beset  by  racial  strife,  and  therefore  refrained  from  even  con-
sidering moving there, no one ever set them straight. 

In any case,  Levitt's  experience  with  New Jersey's  Fair  Hous-
ing  Law did not discourage  him from  building two  other subdi-
visions  in the  state,  both  integrated.  Conversely,  in  his  Bel  Air, 
Maryland, subdivision near Washington, D.C.,  Levitt announced 
from  the start  that  he would  go  along with local  "customs"  and 
would not sell  to  Negroes,  thus once again  inviting court action 
and demonstrations by local  pro-integration organizations.27 

Reasons for the Success of Desegregation 

Had  it  not  been  for  the  state  law  banning  discrimination  in 
government-supported housing developments and  the court's  in-
terpretation of FHA mortgage insurance as  a form of government 
support, Levittown might still  be an all-white community today. 
When  the  builder  decided  to  anticipate  the  court's  decision, 
however,  an  effective  decision-making  apparatus  for  implement-
ing  integration  was  quickly  established.  Moreover,  Levitt  used 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  381  • 

two  methods  for  which  he  had  previously  shown~ little  enthusi-
asm:  the employment of outside experts and deliberate planning, 
primarily  to  avoid  a  repetition  of  the  events  in  Levittown, 
Pennsylvania.  In  many  ways,  then,  the  successful  integration  of 
Levittown,  New  Jersey,  was  a  direct  consequence  of  the  racial 
conflict and ensuing publicity in the older Levittown. 

Major  credit  must  be  given  to  the  consultant,  however,  and 
particularly  to his  approach.  He did not attempt  to change com-
munity attitudes,  but systematically confronted the major partic-
ipants in  the  process  (as  well  as  possible  sources  of conflict),  and 
persuaded them to adopt behavior  patterns that would assure  the 
success  of  the venture,  yet  without  requiring  them  to  surrender 
their own major goals.  Writing about an orientation session with 
the Levitt sales staff, he described his approach as follows: 

[It was]  designed  to accomplish  two  principal  missions:  (1) 
to  obtain  through  discussion  some  measure  of  the  respon-
siveness  of  this  highly  influential  group  of opinion-makers 
to  the  new  policy,  and  (2)  to  enable  the  consultants  to 
present  the  inevitable  situation  which  conditions  and  the 
law  imposed.  There was  no  hope of converting  those  hold-
ing negative  views.  The session  was geared  to  reinforce  the 
official  position of the employing firm with fact and research 
findings, and information as  to the legal aspects of their own 
acts as agents of a building firm. 2s 

Aware that order was  the goal of highest priority, he developed 
a  consensus  among  the relevant community officials  and  leaders, 
and  communicated  it  to  the  residents.  The  mechanism  was  a 
new,  short-term institution devoted solely  to  the implementation 
of integration, made up of existing community institutions which 
were  in  turn  in  contact  with  many  residents.  This  new  institu-
tion had both an actual component-sets of instructions and pres-
sures placed on participants to conform to the integration plan-
and  a  performing  component,  the  Human  Relations ·council,· 
which  sought  to  demonstrate  that  most  Levittowners  were  not 
opposed  to  integration.  In  peopling  this  institution,  the  consul-
tant  provided  positive  roles  for  those  willing  to  participate and 
gave  the  unwilling an  opportunity  to  stay  on  the  sidelines.  The 
ministers were able  to develop a  united front  for  their churches, 
the  police  chief  got  a  chance  to  demonstrate  his  department's 
professionalism,  and  the  politicians  were  allowed  to  stay  out  to 
prevent the issue  from  hurting them politically. Finally,  the con-

•  382  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

sultant  was  able  to  persuade  a  community  most  of  whose  resi-
dents were opposed to integration  to accept  it without visible re-
action.  The ministers added a  moral  imperative  to  the legal  im-
perative  supplied  by  the  law,  making  it  difficult  for  anyone  to 
come  out  publicly  against  integration.  Opposition  was  thus  re-
stricted  to private grumbling,  and  it was  dissipated  between  the 
time  integration  was  announced  and  the  first  Negro  family  ar-
rived. 

Even  so,  desegregation  might  not  have  proceeded  so  smoothly 
had it not been for  the willingness of Levittowners to cooperate. 
Five factors were responsible:  the legal  imperative, the absence of 
status  threat,  the class  level  of both white and Negro purchasers, 
the physical layout of the community, and  its newness.  Undoubt-
edly,  the  court decision  set  the  stage  for  a  positive  climate,  and 
so  did  Levitt's  decision  to  integrate  "voluntarily"  after previous 
vigorous  opposition.  Levittowners  realized,  I  think,  that  Levitt 
stood  to  lose  many  white  sales,  and  felt  that  if  he  nevertheless 
went along voluntarily they had  no good reason  to do otherwise. 
Still,  they  might  have  objected  to  the  possible  loss  of commu-
nity  status.  Of  course,  only  the  new  neighborhoods  were  in-
volved,  but even  so,  everyone  knew  that from  now  on,  the  out-
side world would consider the entire community  integrated.  But 
the  arrival  of  Negroes  was  not  interpreted  as  a  major  status 
threat, principally because Levittown was--and would remain-a 
predominantly middle  class  town.  Higher-status  people  had  not 
yet begun to leave,  and the fears  of property value and status de-
cline that threatened working class people in Levittown, Pennsyl-
vania,  and  contributed  to  its  racial  disturbance  were  not  pres-
ent.29  Even  though  residential  turnover  and  tax  problems  were 
serious enough  to frighten  both working class  and lower middle 
class residents,  they did not panic. Many knew that racial conflict 
might well  begin to reduce Levittown's  prestige,  and even  those 
who  opposed  integration  often  said  that  it  was  preferable  to  a 
riot.  If they had felt  really  threatened, however,  these  considera-
tions would have been ignored in the heat of panic. 

One reason people did not panic can be found in their own so-
cioeconomic  position  and  in  their  expectation  that  the  Negro 
newcomers would share it.  Research on prejudice and racial  con-
flict  has  demonstrated  that  these  are  less  intense at  higher socio-
economic  levels,  and  the  white  New  Jersey  Levittowners  were 
more  affluent  than  the  Pennsylvanians.  The  Negroes  who  came 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  s83  • 

were  clearly  and  visibly  middle  class  people,  with  more  educa-
tion,  better  jobs,  and  higher  family  incomes  than  most  whites, 
but the white  Levittowners  did not  know  this  in advance.  Even 
so,  most were convinced that poor Negroes could not buy in their 
community and  that the builder would not admit slum dwellers. 
Although the belief that only a  few atypical Negroes could afford 
Levittown  was  a  way  of  reassuring  oneself  of  the  community's 
high status,  the  fact  that  people  were convinced  of  this without 
data  to  back  up  their  feelings  suggests  again  the  lack  of intense 
status fears. 

The physical  layout of Levittown into separate neighborhoods 
made  it  possible  for  segregationists  in  the  existing  ones  to  feel 
secure in the knowledge that their own areas were still  white, and 
that  the  Negroes  were  geographically  and  socially  far  away. 30 
The  mixture  of  house  types  on  the  block  scattered  low-income 
residents  throughout  the  community, and segregationists among 
them, living amid people who favored  integration or order above 
all,  probably never  knew  how  many others shared  their  feelings 
and  were  willing  to  act on  them.  In  the  older  Levittown,  one-
price  neighborhoods concentrated such  people and  made  it easy 
for  them  to get together with like-minded neighbors. One Levit-
towner who had lived in the Pennsylvania community during the 
disturbance  described  her  block  there  as  "very  negative;  nice 
neighbors became ugly,  took their kids evenings and went over to 
the (Negro] house to throw stones." 

Finally,  the  success  of  integration  must  be  traced  also  to  the 
community's newness.  Levittown, Pennsylvania had been in exis-
tence  for  six  years  when  the  first  Negro  arrived,  but  the  New 
Jersey  community  had  only  been  established  for  two,  another 
reason  why  status  decline  had  not  yet  begun.  The desire  to  be 
law-abiding, orderly, and idealistic was  typical  of a  new commu-
nity, and so was  the police department's desire  to be the best in 
the county. The politicians' reluctance to participate in the inte-
gration process can  be attributed to newness as  well, for  they did 
not yet know their constituents well enough to take a  stand. Had 
they been aware of a  significant bloc of anti-integration opinion, 
one  of them  might  have  been  tempted  to  exploit  it for  political 
benefit.  And  the  newness  of  the  neighborhood  into  which  the 
first  Negroes  moved made  it  impossible for  segregationists  to re-
cruit their neighbors for opposition.  In an already settled neigh-
borhood,  they  would  have  known  similarly  inclined  residents. 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

In fact,  the positive  role  of  the community's newness raises the 
question  whether  integration should not have  been instituted at 
the  very  start.  Pro-integration  groups  in  the  Philadelphia  area 
had urged this step on the builder, and if it had been taken, there 
would have been no need for advance  planning to  prevent a  dis-
turbance.  Moreover,  the housing market was  healthier then, and 
the Levitt house a  better bargain in 1958  than in  1960. Although 
the  builder would  have  lost  some  sales  among  militant  segrega-
tionists,  most  of  them  would  really  not  have  had  an  alternative 
source  of  new,  low-priced  homes.  Moreover,  voluntary  integra-
tion  would  have  avoided  a  court  case,  saved  legal  costs  for  the 
builder, and brought a  number of symbolic rewards-and favor-
able  national  publicity-for  a  progressive  and  courageous  act. 
There are,  however,  some good arguments against  initial  inte-
gration.  When  Levittown  was  first  occupied,  the  state  law  had 
not  yet  been  tested  in  the  courts,  and  the  legal  imperative  was 
still  lacking.  Consequently,  antagonistic  Levittowners  who  later 
wished  to  be  law-abiding  might  have  been  less  reluctant  about 
acting out their prejudices.  Organizations badly  in need of mem-
bers  might  have  turned  away  Negroes  for  fear  of scaring off  po-
tential white members, and the politicians,  then  terribly short of 
issues,  might  have  made  one  out  of  integration.  Since  neither 
Levitt  nor  community  leaders  would  have  known  the  commu-
nity, it would probably have been impossible to plan against such 
occurrences,  and  without  the  positive  community climate,  inter-
ested  Negro  buyers,  not knowing what they would face  in Levit-
town,  might  have  been  discouraged from  coming.31 

Comparing  the  benefits  and  costs  of  initial  and  later  integra-
tion is  difficult,  but I  suspect  that in the absence of legal  inevita-
bility in  1958, opening the community to Negroes from  the start 
would have been more problematic. This conclusion applies only 
to Levittown;  other communities might well  benefit from  initial 
integration.  Even  so,  the  choice  between  the  two  alternatives  is 
less  important  than  the  fact  that  even  after  Levittown  was 
opened to  Negroes, only a  handful came.  Results of successful  in-
tegration experiences ought to be  better publicized so  that other 
comJT •Jnities can use  them  to plan, and so  that Negroes who are 
justifiably  concerned  about  the  hardships  of  moving  into  an 
overwhelmingly  white community can  learn  that  they  have  less 
to fear than they think. But the main problem is  to do away with 
the economic inequities that now prevent so  many Negroes from 
affording suburban homes or decent shelter of any kind. 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  sBs  • 

THE QUALITY  OF COMMUNITY PLANNING 

The activities of the community's Planning Board and its profes· 
sional consultant provide a  less  happy illustration of nonpolitical 
decision-making. As  I  noted in Chapter One, the Planning Board 
had  been  set  up  before  Levitt  purchased  land,  and  it,  together 
with  its  consultant,  cooperated  fully  with  Levitt's  efforts  and 
plans.  Once  the community was  occupied,  the old residents  who 
served  as  board  members  were  replaced  by  newcomers-party 
workers  who  were  being  rewarded  for  their  campaign  contribu-
tions  and  engineers  and  real  estate  salesmen  who  had  (or  were 
thought  to  have)  some  expertise on planning matters.  Like  most 
other municipal  agencies,  the  Planning Board  initiated  little  ac-
tivity  of  its  own,  but responded  to  requests  that  came  before  it, 
most  of  which  were  for  approval  of  small  shopping  centers  on 
land  not  owned  by  Levitt.  For  example,  from  January  1g6o  to 
May  1961,  46  per cent of  the  items on  the  board's calendar fell 
into  this category. and another  15  per cent dealt with  the proper 
size  of signs for  stores and  gas  stations.  Only  11  per  cent  of  the 
agenda  dealt  with  more  general  planning  topics,  the  major  one 
concerning the number of gas  stations  to  be permitted in Levit-
town. 

Since  the  board  members  knew  little  about  planning,  they 
usually gave  the consultant free  rein to propose what he thought 
best,  adopting  his  recommendations  as  their  own  except  when 
they  became  controversial.  The consultant's  main  function  was 
to check shopping center plans to make sure that they were in ac-
cord with  municipal  ordinances,  had  enough ·parking space,  and 
were designed  for  efficient  traffic  circulation.  He  also  advocated 
changes  in  the  community's  planning  ordinances,  among  them 
that stores and gas stations should be built in Colonial style so  as 
to coincide with the design  of the houses and that signs by which 
stores advertised  their presence  should  be limited  in size.82  Both 
proposals  were  bitterly  fought  by  the  applicants  for  sites,  espe-
cially by chains which wanted the same  elevations and signs  they 
built  elsewhere  in  the  nation,  but  eventually  they  went  along 
with the board because they had no other choice. 

The builder and the Planning Board supported the consultant 
because  they agreed  that  the  community  should  be  esthetically 
pleasing  and  that  this  could  be  achieved  by  architectural  har-
mony of the kind he proposed. The residents were primarily con-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

cerned with status protection and wanted to make sure that com-
mercial  establishments  did  not  infiltrate  residential  areas.  In-
deed,  their  concern  for  protection-also  shared  by  most  of  the 
board members-was strong enough that sometimes the Planning 
Board went beyond what the planner had proposed.  When some 
residents  objected  to  the  number of gas  stations  being  built  in 
the  community,  the  planner  was  asked  to  write  an  ordinance 
limiting  them,  and  the  Planning  Board  was  able  to  persuade 
Levitt  to  put just one gas  station  on any  intersection  he owned. 
The consultant was  overruled only when  his  proposals generated 
political  opposition,  for  example,  his  recommendation  to  let  all 
nonresident  doctors  purchase  homes  for  offices  and  his  rejection 
of a  variance request by  the powerful VFW to build a clubhouse 
near a residential area. 

One of  the  planner's  most  important duties was  to  prepare a 
community  master  plan  to  regulate  future  growth.  Since  there 
was  little  community  interest  in  a  master  plan,  and  not  many 
people knew what ought to go into it, he had considerable leeway 
to  make-or at  least  propose--decisions  about  the  community's 
future.  Of course,  he  was  limited  by  the  small  budget allocated 
for -township  planning,  by the builder's role  in the community's 
future,  and  by  his  own  decision  to  coordinate  his  master  plan-
ning  with  the  builder's.  As  I  indicated  in  Chapter  One,  the 
planner's sympathies  were  more  with  Levitt  than  with  the  resi-
dents.  He believed fervently  in what he defined  to be good plan-
ning,  saw  his role as  "trying to  teach good  planning to  the Plan-
ning  Board  and  the  Levitt  Company,"  and  felt  that  "the  best 
kind of planning was  that which also  made good business sense." 
His  planning  philosophy  and  his  judgment of  where  the  power 
lay dictated that he work closely with the builder in planning for 
the  township,  and  that  he  adapt  his  recommendations  to  the 
builder's proposals.  As  a  result,  the preliminary plan, completed 
in  1959,  coincided closely with Levitt's own scheme.  Both it and 
the  final  plan,  published  in  1964,  proposed  and  located  future 
community facilities  ranging from  schools  to shopping areas and 
utility  systems,  suggested  some  revisions  in  the  design  of  resi-
dential  areas,  and  advocated  improvements  in  some  municipal 
services. 

The final  plan deserves detailed examination as a  case of poor 
nonpolitical decision-making.  It ran to  two volumes,  but one was 
taken  up  with  "basic  studies"  of  the  community  which  told 

Politics  and  Planning 

Levittowners  little  they  did  not  know  already. 33  The  second 
volume was  devoted  to a  "Suggested Development Plan," and  in 
accordance  with  contemporary  planning  thought,  proposed  a 
number  of  "community  objectives"  and  policy  proposals  to 
achieve them. Community objectives are of great significance, and 
one would need to know how they were determined. If they were 
really  community  objectives,  the  planner  should  have  inter-
viewed a  sample  of citizens,  or  if  lack  of funds  made  this  impos-
sible,  at  least  the political  leaders.  The  report does  not  indicate 
how  the planner determined them, and states only, "the develop-
ment  plan  has  formulated  objectives  which  all  citizens  and 
officials  should  strive  to  achieve." 84  Since  the  planner  gathered 
most  of his  information about  Levittown  from  the  U.S.  Census, 
he  could  not  have  learned  the  objectives  from  the  community. 
Judging  by  their  content,  some  came  from  the  decision-makers, 
some  from  the  builder,  but  the  majority  were  his  own. 3~  Ac-
tually, most were such general and vague statements that one sus-
pects  no  analysis  of any  kind  went  into  their  formulation.  As  a 
result,  the objectives were  not ranked  in any order of priority to 
indicate which were of most urgency, and, of course, they paid no 
attention  to  the  community's  diversity,  thus  giving  residents  no 
opportunity  to  debate  alternatives.  Since  their  generality  made 
them virtually useless  for  planning purposes,  the  main weight of 
the plan fell  on  the policy proposals, but these also seemed bereft 
of  analysis  and  bore  no  logical  or  empirical  relationship  to  the 
objectives  they  were· supposed  to  achieve.  If they  were  intended 
as means to community goals, the plan providoo no evidence  that 
they could or would realize these goals. 

These deficiencies  can  be  illustrated  by an  analysis of some of 
the  plan's  ten  objectives  and  the  relevant  policy  recommenda-
tions:  86 

Objective  1:  Achieve  an  environment  for  the  people  of 
Willingboro  by  providing  for  the  human  ac-
tivities  of work,  leisure,  play,  rest,  education, 
religion  and  esthetic  fulfillment. 

This statement,  although  typically  found  in  planning reports,  is 
so  general  as  to  be  meaningless.  It  fails  to  define  an  "environ-
ment," or  to indicate  what kinds of work,  leisure,  play,  etc.,  are 
wanted  by  various  sectors  of  the  population  and  which  are  de-
sirable by other criteria. 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

The plan's policies  for  achievement of this  objective deal  with 
only  a  few  "human  activities."  Leisure  needs  are  to  be  met  by 
township  parks,  playgrounds,  playfields,  tot-lots,  walking areas,  a 
marina,  and  a  golf  course.  However  desirable,  these  offer  only 
athletic  outdoor  recreation,  principally  for  children  (especially 
boys),  for  men,  and  for  families  affluent  enough  to  own  a  boat. 
No  provision  is  made  for  nonathletic  forms  of  leisure,  such  as 
commercial  entertainment, and nothing is  said  about facilitating 
sociability and  reducing the  social  isolation  which  I  reported on 
in  earlier  chapters.  Also,  there  is  no  plan  for  the  needs  of  teen-
agers,  other  than  to  suggest  a  "Teenage  Center"  as  part  of  the 
public  library,  to  be  located  near  the  senior  high  school.  A 
moment's  observation  is  enough  to  show  that  adolescents would 
look skeptically on a center located in the library-an institution 
that demands  quiet  from  its  users,  or one sited  next  to  the  high 
school-an  institution  that  discourages  precisely  the  kind  of 
recreation  teenagers want.  Moreover,  the  plan  is  silent about the 
activities  of  the  center,  whether  it  would  be  run  by  teenage  or 
adult  rules  or  what  it  would  do  to  give  teenagers  a  function  in 
the community. 

Esthetic  fulfillment  is  to  be  provided  through  the  establish-
ment  of  parks  and  the  preservation  of  "natural  features"  of  the 
original  rural  landscape.  The  plan  offers  no  evidence  for  (or 
against)  the  assumption  that  a  significant  number  of  people  de-
rive  esthetic  pleasure  from  looking at  or  being in  parks,  and  no 
provision is  made for other forms  of esthetic  pleasure-seeking,  be 
they museums or movies.  The plan argues  that "the park should 
be designed to give  the residents an opportunity to get away from 
the  noise  and  rush  of  traffic  and  enjoy contact  with  nature  once 
again." 37  It offers  no  data,  however,  that  Levittowners  want  to 
escape  from  local  noise  and  traffic  (which  were,  of  course, 
minimal),  that  they  want  to  enjoy  contact  with  nature,  or  that 
they prefer  to do this in  a  park rather  than in  their own gardens 
or at a beach. 

Planning  for  education  is  limited  to  listing  the  number  of 
needed  schools,  suggesting  their  acreage,  and  locating  them  on 
specific  sites  on  the  "Development  Plan  Map."  There  is  no  dis-
cussion  of  what  kinds  of  education  are  wanted  by  the  residents 
(or  even  by  the  planner),  or why  the elementary school  needs  to 
be  15  to  20 acres,  and  the senior high school  40  to 50.  Such acre-
ages  may  be  desirable  and  necessary,  but  the community  might 

Politics  and  Planning 

also  want  to  spend  scarce  funds  on  other  educational  objec-
tives. 

Planning  for  work  is  touched  on  only  in  a  brief  statement 
about industrial  facilities  that reads:  "The present  nature of  the 
township would seem  to dictate that any industry in 'Willingboro 
should be of the quiet  type,  . . .  research  and development lab-
oratories  and  administrative  offices,  light  manufacturing  pro-
cesses  and  warehousing  and  storage." 38  The  plan  says  nothing 
about whether Levittowners want to work in  their own  commu-
nity or not, and if so,  what kinds of work they would like to have 
or are  qualified  for,  and  whether  it could  be  provided  in  Levit-
town. 

Objective  2:  Establish  local  commercial  shopping  center 
sites  in  the  Township  and  at  the  same  time 
set  a  policy  which  discourages  strip  commer-
cial  development  off  Route  U.S.  130. 

This objective  is  a  policy  statement which  does  not refer  to  any 
broader  goal,  but  reflects  the  planning  consultant's  intense  dis-
like of strip shopping.  It is  clearly  his  own  goal,  and  although a 
shopping center may well  be preferable to stores strung along the 
highway,  there is  no evidence either in his report or in my obser-
vations  that Levitlowners were very  much concerned about what 
kinds  of  stores  they  shopped  in. 3G  If they  had  shopping  goals  of 
their  own,  these  probably  had  to  do  with  low  prices,  and  the 
availability, accessibility, and variety of stores. 

Objective  4:  Provide  the foundation  for  a  sound and func-

tional  municipal  service  program. 

This  objective  is  meaningless  unless  the  terms  "sound"  and 
"functional"  are  defined.  Policies  related  to  the  statement  are 
limited to a suggestion  that water and sewer facilities are in good 
order,  that more policemen and a  second  fire  station are needed, 
that  the  public  works  department  requires  more  storage  space, 
and that a  township medical building (the functions of which are 
not  specified)  ought  to  be  attached  to  the  existing  hospital. 
Nothing is  said about what kinds of new services  the community 
wants  or  should  have,  or  how  existing  services  might  be  im-
proved.  For  example,  the  expansion  of  the  police  force  is  pro-
posed  without  questioning  whether  the  town's  crime  rate  or 
traffic  problems  justify  it.  Similarly,  nothing  is  said  about  the 

kinds of medical services residents want and need, about counsel-
ing  and  mental  health  facilities,  or about  how  to  pay  for  them. 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Objective  8:  Develop  a  program  to  help  balance  existing 
and  future  residential  development  with  ap-
propriate  ratables  that  will:  provide  lands 
for  future  industrial  and  commercial  expan-
sion,  offer  recommendations  for  future  con-
trol  of  highway  development  off  U.S.  Route 
130,  provide  sites  for  local  planned shopping 
centers,  establish  certain  remaining  tracts  for 
a  lower density pattern of residential develop-
ment. 

This objective is  deficient on several  grounds.  It is  unclear,  mak-
ing it impossible  to  tell  whether the primary aim  is  to  "balance" 
existing and  future  residential  development  or  to solve  the  tax 
problems of the community.  Moreover,  no evidence is  given  that 
providing land for  commerce and  industry and doing away  with 
strip  shopping  will  create  either  "balance"  or  "appropriate" 
ratables.  Nothing is  said about the community's unwillingness to 
pay higher property taxes or about feasible  alternative sources  of 
public funds,  given  the likelihood that sufficient  industry cannot 
be attracted  to  Levittown.  In  fact,  the  plan  does  not  concern  it-
self with the tax problem at all,  except to  provide a detailed anal-
ysis  of current sources of municipal  income and expenditure pat-
terns and to point out repeatedly that "the only recourse available 
to lessen  the burden of the individual  taxpayer is  the addition of 
profitable  ratables  to  the  Township's  tax  base." 40  The  Sug-
gested  Development Plan does  not  even  raise  the  tax  base  issue, 
and  does  not  suggest  how  Levittown  can  solve  its  financial  di-
lemma. 

Admittedly, one should not expect the planner to solve  the in-
soluble,  but  then  he  should  have  indicated  that  no  solution 
existed and that Levittown  could choose  to  increase  the tax  rate 
further,  keep  it at  its  present  level  and  restrict  future  expendi-
tures  accordingly,  or  lobby  for  state  and  federal  subsidies.  The 
planner  should  also  have  estimated  the  costs  of  his  various  pro-
posals  and,  since  Levittowners  object  to  higher  taxes,  indicated 
which  were  of greater  urgency  than  others  in  case  not all  could 
be  financed.  Instead,  the  report  concludes  hopefully:  "In  short, 
the  Planning  Board  realizes  that  it  cannot  wave  a  magic  wand 
and make new industry flock  to Willingboro, but that honest and 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  391.  • 

steady work by the Planning Board,  the  Industrial  Development 
Committee, Town Council, and the public will  result in substan-
tial gains  for  the Township." 41 

Despite  the  community's  great concern  over  taxes,  the  actual 
plan  is  most  detailed  about  policies  for  future  residential  de-
velopment.  In  describing these  policies,  the  planner adds  a  new 
objective,  for  he suggests:  "A prime objective of the Township's 
development plan is  not only the recognition of continued devel-
opment of single-family  houses  but to recommend a  wider diver-
sification  of  future  residential  lots  and  dwelling  types  that  will 
accommodate  a  possible  so,ooo  people." 42  No  reason  is  given 
why  such  diversification  is  desirable,  or  why  the  town  should 
eventually  have  a  population  of  50,000.43  The  policies  them-
selves  call  for  the  construction  of  houses  on  larger  lots,  which 
presumably  means  more  expensive  houses  as  well,  although  this 
is  not stated.  There is  no discussion  of whether Levittown could 
attract  high-income  residents,  a  particularly  important  omission 
since  Levitt has  so  far  been  unable  to  do so.  Nor is  there any in-
dication of the virtue of such an approach or of whether it would 
help provide significant additional tax revenues. 

Instead of  dealing  with such  questions,  the  plan proposes  that 
many  of  the  future  houses  be  sited  in  "cluster  subdivisions,"  a 
series  of cui-de-sacs  surrounded  by  public  open  space,  instead  of 
in  "conventional"  subdivisions  of  houses  placed  side  by  side  on 
curving  streets.  The  planner's  argument  for  this  innovation,  a 
current fad  in site planning, sometimes borders on  the  ludicrous. 
It indicates  that  conventional  subdivisions  create  urban  sprawl, 
"provide  row  upon  row  of  stereotyped  houses,  many  with  un-
sightly and  unkept  yards  . . .  and  utility  poles  weave  a  tangled 
web  of  wires." 44  The  cluster,  on  the  other  hand,  ''helps  reduce 
the  dangerous  intersections  and  streets  found  in  conventional 
subdivisions,  [is]  uncluttered  with  overhead  utility  wires,  [pro-
vides]  greater variety of house styles,  nearby open space, and pre-
vents children from  playing in the streets." 45 

The  plan  offers  no  evidence  for  these  statements.  In  actual 
fact,  urban sprawl  is caused by speculative land acquisition which 
often leaves vacant and unbuildable spaces  between subdivisions, 
but has  nothing  to do  with  the  site  planning of specific  subdivi-
sions.  Moreover,  there  is  no  reason  why  houses  need  be  stereo-
types  in  the conventional  subdivision or more varied  in  the clus-
ter style;  this  is  a  function  of builders'  practices and  house  price 

•  392  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

decisions.  Unsightly yards can exist in any site plan, and whether 
utility  poles  are  located  above  or  below  ground  is  a  function  of 
cost  (and  house  price) and not of the site plan.  Also, no evidence 
is  offered  that either plan will  prevent children  from  playing on 
the  streets  (they  actually  play  mainly  on  the  sidewalk  and  very 
little  on  the  grass)  or  that  the  conventional  subdivision  has 
created  traffic  accidents and danger  to children,  at least  in  Levit-
town.  Finally,  there is  no evidence  that buyers want more public 
open  space  or  are  willing  to  pay  the  taxes  to  have  it  main-
tained. 

Whether or not the cluster plan is superior to the conventional 
one  is  not at issue  here;  what  matters  is  that  the  planner is  pro-
posing a  scheme  requiring  more  expensive  houses  without  com-
menting  on  either  their  feasibility  or  desirability.  1\loreover,  if 
industry  is  to  be  attracted,  it  might  be  argued  that  Levittown 
should  provide  less  expensive  houses so  that workers  in  these  in-
dustries  can  live  there,  especially  since  a  firm's  location decision 
today  often  hinges  on  the  provision  of  housing  and  other  facil-
ities for its workers. 

Objective  10:  Develop  a  plan  for  the  health,  safety  and 
general  welfare of  all  the  people  of Willing-
boro that promotes good civic design,  stresses 
the efficient expenditure of public funds and 
recommends  provision  of  necessary  public 
services  and  facilities  for  the  future. 

This  final  objective  illustrates  the  deficiencies  of  the  plan  as  a 
who:e.  Despite  its  claims,  the  plan  has  not concerned  itself with 
the  health  and  safety  of  all  the  people,  nor  has  it  sought  to  de-
termine  their  welfare,  i.e.,  their  goals  and  problems.  Instead,  it 
has  accepted  some  of  the  builders'  and  the  municipal  agencies' 
demands,  and combined  them with  standard  planning proposals 
(such  as  large  acreages  for  schools)  and  with  current  site-plan-
ning fashions,  which  are  equated  with  "good  civic  design."  The 
plan does recommend public services and facilities,  but its defini-
tion  of  "necessary  services"  is  based  on  the  growth  demands  of 
various  municipal agencies,  and  not  on what Levittowners  need, 
want, or are willing  to  pay for.  Also,  no evidence is given for  the 
claim  that  the  plan  achieves  the  aim  of  efficient  expenditure  of 
public funds.  It fails  to define efficiency or to identify the goals in 
relation  to  which  efficiency  is  to  be  determined  and  neglects  to 

Politics .and  Planning 

offer alternative schemes which might be more efficient in achiev-
ing  even  the  goals  that  the  planner  has  set  for  the  community. 
For  example,  if  the  plan  wants  to  maximize  the  welfare  and 
safety  of  the  community,  it  would  be  more  efficient  and  more 
welfare-oriented to provide for  the needs of the teenagers beyond 
an obviously inadequate Teenage Center than to increase the size 
of the police force. 

The plan's lack  of interest  in  the citizens'  objectives was  com-
pounded  by  the  planner's  failure  to  pay  attention  to  citizens' 
opinions.  He spent little time in  the community, and judging by 
his  occasional  appearances  at  public  hearings,  made  no  effort  to 
understand them.  He  first  made  people unhappy  when  he failed 
to question the location of a gas station immediately adjacent to a 
church. At a hearing on  the preliminary plan, he antagonized  his 
audience by  his  unwillingness  to  discuss  the  bases  for  his  recom-
mendations,  justifying a  particularly controversial  one  by  asking 
people  to  accept  "thirteen  years  of  experience  and  long  discus-
sions  with  the  Planning  Board"  instead.  Following  a  public 
meeting on  the final  plan, a  local columnist  took  him to  task  for 
blithely  jumping to  conclusions  about  controversial  community 
issues,  such  as  the  then  bitterly  fought  garden  apartment  ordi-
nance.  In  a  caustic  column  which  also  questioned  his  presenta-
tion of obvious  facts  in  the guise  of  technical  jargon  and  his  re-
liance on outdated  census  statistics,  she  reported  him  as  saying: 

A community of young children requires "increased schools, 
police,  fire  protection,  recreation  and garbage  disposal"  [in 
THAT order?].  He then added that a  higher tax levy would 
be  required.  [There  were  only  seven  in  the  audience  and 
nobody  stood  up  and  cheered.]  Just  after  that  I  caught  a 
phrase  pregnant  with  meaning  . . .  "more  intensive  resi-
dential  use."  Is  this  a  sophisticated  way  of  saying  apart-
ments? 46 

The  planner  often  appealed  for  popular  support  of  planning 
through  "citizen  participation,"  but  he  gave  people  no  oppor-
tunity  to  participate,  and  his  actions  indicated  that  he  only 
wanted  their  assent  to  his  proposals.  In  fact,  Levittowners  who 
wanted  to  talk  with  him  found  it difficult  to  see  him,  and  when 
they succeeded,  he was  insensitive  to their concerns.  He failed  to 
explain  his  close working relatiomhip with  the builder and  took 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

little  interest  in  zoning  issues.  He  never  quite  understood  peo-
ple's  status  fears,  and  could  not  fathom  why  some  objected  to 
nonresident doctors, clubhouses, or gas stations, and why they did 
not  embrace  his  vendetta  against  strip  shopping  and  hot  dog 
stands.  And  he  was  totally  unaware  of  the  living  patterns,  the 
problems  of  social  and  physical  isolation,  and  the  community-
related worries  which  I  described in earlier chapters.  His  inabil-
ity  to comprehend even  the  Levittowners' occupational and class 
level  is  underscored  by  a  sentence  in  the  planning report  which 
suggests  that,  "Results  [in  attracting  new  industry]  are  also  ob-
tained  when  the residents  of  the  community  . . .  in  their daily 
contacts  with  businessmen,  industrialists,  and  investors  make 
their  community  interests  known." 47  I  doubt  whether  even 
William  Levitt  himself  had  such  daily  contacts,  but  then  the 
planner was  interested in land  use,  not  people;  in  efficiency  and 
"balance,"  not  in  people's demands and needs;  in site  plans and 
community facilities, not in how people live. 

As  a  result,  the community gave  him little support.  Of course, 
uninformed about  planning,  people could  perhaps  not  have  dis-
tinguished  between good and bad master plans.  But the planning 
they received all  dealt either with future community facilities,  of 
interest only to  later arrivals, or with vague generalizations about 
the community's problems, which they could not get the  planner 
to  discuss  openly.  Admittedly,  long-range  planning rarely  inter-
ests  many  people,  but  when  the  planner  ignores  their  present 
problems,  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  care  little  about  long-
Tange  ones.  And  when  the  planner  is  not  trusted  by  the  com-
munity,  he  loses  the support  of even  the cosmopolitans,  who are 
usually the most enthusiastic advocates of  planning. 

The  planner's  approach  and  his  master  plan  are  not  unique; 
the  Suggested  Development  Plan  is  quite  typical  of  those  pre-
pared  for  small  (and  even  large)  communities all  over  the coun-
try,  and  the  lack  of  contact  with  the citizens  and  the  concentra-
tion  on  future  physical  development are common as  well.  So  are 
the undue reliance on census data,  the concern with  professional 
objectives,  the  proposal  of policies  which are  professionally fash-
ionable but bear no logical or empirical relation to the objectives 
they  are  supposed  to  achieve,  the failure  to  provide  evidence for 
crucial  points  in  the  argument,  and  the  sloppy  methods  of anal-
ysis  and  synthesis  which  go  into  the  policy  proposals.48  It is  no 
wonder,  then,  that  planning  remains  a  poorly  budgeted  munic-

Politics  and  Planning 

•  395  • 

ipal  activity,  thought  to  be  of  little  relevance  to  the  real  prob-
lems of the community. 

LOCAL  DEMOCRACY  AND  CENTRAL  PLANNING 

The success of desegregation and even  the failure of master plan-
ning demonstrate that nonpolitical decision-making-or, to call  it 
by  its  rightful  name,  planning-can  be  implemented  in  a  local 
community when  properly  handled.  Of course,  it  is  not  entirely 
fair  to  compare  the  two  processes,  for  the  planner  had  a  much 
more  complex  assignment.  The  integration  consultant  had  to 
deal with a  single issue;  the decision  that generated  the plan  had 
already  been  made,  and  the  power  of  the  state  and  the  builder 
stood  behind  it.  The  planner,  on  the  other  hand,  had  to  deter-
mine community objectives on a  variety of issues,  make decisions 
about them, and use what little power the Planning Board had or 
could  give  to  demand  their  implementation-and  all  this  with 
probably less money than was spent for integration. 

Even  so,  the  fact  remains  that  the  integration  consultant 
planned well and the master planner did not. The former evoked 
the  latent community consensus  for  order,  used  it  by organiz·ing 
optimum  communication  between  community  leaders  and  resi-
dents, kept the issue out of the political arena, developed rational 
policies  which  were  logically  related  to  the  goals  he sought,  and 
implemented  them  by  demanding behavior  rather  than  attitude 
change and  by  maximizing  benefits  and  minimizing costs  for  all 
participants wherever  possible.  The master  planner did just  the 
opposite.  He  made  no  attempt  to  look  for  consensus  and  kept 
communication  with  residents  to  a  minimum.  Although  he  saw 
his role as  nonpolitical, he could neither keep major issues out of 
the  political  arena  nor  restrain  himself  from  judgments  about 
controversial  ones.  His  policies  were  irrational,  and  they  asked 
attitude as  well  as  behavior changes  from  people,  requiring their 
conversion  to  his  vision  of  the  community  without  taking  their 
demands  or  needs  into  account.  If benefits  and  costs  had  been 
computed,  the  former  would clearly accrue  to  the  planner (inso-
far  as  the  plan  realized  the  kind  of  community  he  wanted)  and 
the  latter would  be  borne  by  the  residents  who  would  be  both 
paying for  the changes  he  proposed  and altering  their life  styles 
to fit  the plan. 

Successful  planning requires  at  least  six  ingredients:  (1)  suffi-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

cient  local  consensus or outside power to  initiate  the  process;  (2) 
an expert who has  the resources,  skills,  and information  to deter-
mine  community  goals  and  find  the  proper  policies  to  achieve 
them;  (3)  a  set  of  policies  which  maximize  benefits  and  mini-
mize  costs  for  those  sectors  of  the  local  community  whose  co-
operation  is  needed;  (4)  an  overall  organizational  approach 
which  isolates  the  process  from  day-to-day  politics;  (5)  a  com-
munication  system  which  provides  for  maximum  feedback  and 
response  among  the  participants  in  the  process;  and  (6)  enough 
local  consensus  to  implement  the  final  product,  or  power  from 
outside  the  community  to do  so  when  consensus  is  lacking.  The 
most  necessary-and  perhaps  even  the  sufficient-ingredient  is 
outside  power,  for  it  can  insist  on  many  kinds  of  local  action, 
short  of  major  behavior  and  attitude  change  on  the  part  of  the 
population. 

When  such  power  ought  to  be  used  and  when  nonpolitical 
decision-making  has  priority  over  the  local  political  process  is 
another  matter.  An  age-old  question  with  far-reaching  implica-
tions,  it  involves  a  choice  between  politics  and  planning,  demo-
cratic  and  elite  decisions,  majority  rule  and  the  public  interest, 
politicians  and  statesmen-and also  between  home  rule  and  re-
gional  or national  policy.  It is  even at  the  heart of the suburban 
critique,  in  the  choice  between  the  suburbanites'  satisfaction 
with their community and the critics' evaluation which considers 
such  satisfaction  irrelevant.  Proper  treatment  of  this  question 
and  its  various  dichotomies  requires  a  thorough  philosophical 
discussion which is out of place in the framework of a community 
study.  Yet since  my research  in Levittown raised  the question  in 
my  mind,  I  feel  compelled  to  conclude  with  at  least  a  cursory 
attempt at an answer. 

Obviously,  dichotomizing  the  question  is  dangerous; 

the 
choice  is  not  between  politics  or  planning,  etc.,  but  between 
their  relative  priorities  in  different  situations.  The real  issue  is: 
·when  should  outside  or  central  planning  replace  local  democ-
racy.  By  "local  democracy,"  I  mean  a  government  with  equal 
representation  for  all,  maximal  decision-maker  responsiveness, 
optimal  feedback  and  intervention  opportunities,  and  an  elec-
toral  system  that  prevents well-organized  minorities  from  voting 
in their candidates and policies. Levittown fell  shortof this ideal, 
what  with  Levitt's  power  and  the  government's  pervasive  feed-
back restriction.  But if the community is  genuinely democratic, I 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  397  • 

would begin with  the  value judgment that local  democracy  is  of 
high  priority, and  that  its  costs  must  be accepted  along  with  its 
benefits.  If people  are  entitled  to  determine  their  own  destiny 
and  to  do  so  by  majority  rule,  the  right  of  lower  middle  class 
citizens  to  run  their community  by  lower  middle class  priorities 
must also  be granted, even when this results  in decisions  that are 
undesirable from  another perspective.  If democracy is  important, 
one  cannot  set  up  another,  nonpolitical  criterion  for  decision-
making  every  time  the  decision  goes  the  wrong  way.  The  sub-
urban critic,  the city  planner,  and anyone else whose conception 
of  the  good  and  well-planned  community  deviates  from  that, 
say,  of lower  middle  class  Levittowners,  must  therefore  consider 
whether  his  vision  is  so  perfect  and  therefore  so  universal  as  to 
justify  the  downgrading of local  democracy. 

My feeling is  that no such conceptions have yet been put forth; 
upon analysis,  all  the  utopias and even  the more modest commu-
nity plans  turn out to reflect  the philosophies and styles of life of 
one  or  another  sector  of  the  cosmopolitan  upper  middle  class. 
Whatever their virtues-and these are many-they assume either 
a cosmopolitan population or a wholesale and magical conversion 
of noncosmopolitan  people  to  cosmopolitan  culture. Since  more 
than  95  per cent  of  Levittowners  (and  the rest  of  the  world)  are 
now  not cosmopolitan,  the assumption does  not speak  to  present 
policy alternatives. 

Consequently,  the  guidelines  I  suggested  in  Chapter  Eleven 
apply  here  as  well;  people  of  every  culture  have  the  right  to 
choose  what  they  want,  and  unless  it  can  be  proven  that  their 
choices  are  harmful  to  other  important  values  they  hold  or  are 
clearly self-destructive  and  antisocial,  they  also  have  the  right  to 
use  local  democratic  government  to  achieve  their  public  wants. 
The key word is antisocial, for it holds the clue to possible limita-
tions  of  majority  rule.  Antisocial  choices,  I  would  argue  sum-
marily, are those which ignore the  public interest, violate minor-
ity  rights,  and  prevent  the  achievement  of  minority  demands. 
The  nature  and  boundaries  of  the  public  interest  have  been 
debated  as  long  as  mankind  has  lived  in  communities,  but  I 
would take it to be either an interest that is consensual, shared by 
all  or almost  all  people  in  their role  as  community members,  or 
holistic, so  important  to  the  community as  a  whole  that  it must 
override  the  conflicting  personal  or communal  interests  of indi-
vidual  members. 49  Moreover,  each  must  be  divided  into  two 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

levels,  the absolute,  which  outweighs all  other  interests, and  the 
relative,  which  requires  a  determination  whether  the  public  in-
terest  is  actually  more  important  than  the diverging  personal  or 
community interests of its members.  A  matter of absolute  public 
interest  would  override  the  individual  interests  of  members;  a 
relative one might not. 

The  consensual  public  interest  of  either  level  can  be  deter-
mined  through  the  political  process,  for  in  casting  their  vote, 
people  can  presumably  decide  whether  the  issue  is  important 
enough  to  override  their  individual  interests.  Instances  of  the 
consensual  public interest are few  and far  between,  for  rarely do 
people  have  enough  in  common  to  unite  for  one  goal.  Perhaps 
Levittowners carne  close  to  consensus  in  wanting  to  avoid  racial 
conflict,  and  there  being  few  personal  interests  in  the  way,  they 
could consider it a  matter of absolute public interest. They prob-
ably  also  agreed  that  the  community  should  obtain  industry  to 
reduce  taxes,  but here the issue  is  one of relative  public  interest, 
for  once  the  means  of  obtaining  industry  are  considered,  other 
concerns  may  get  in  the  way.  For  example,  it  is  questionable 
whether  Levittowners would  willingly  pay  such  costs  as  a  bene-
ficial  tax  rate  to  industry,  the  publicly  financed  construction  of 
industrial  buildings, and the  provision of low-priced housing for 
workers.  These  costs  would  reduce  not  only  the  ultimate  tax 
benefits,  but  also  the  community's  status,  and  only  a  detailed 
benefit-cost analysis  could  tell  voters whether obtaining industry 
fits  the  consensual  public  interest  more  closely  than  a  reduced 
program of municipal services. 

Issues  in  the holistic public interest are also rare.  Although in-
terveners  often  claimed  their  own  demands  were  so  important 
that  they  justified  the  rejection  of  individual  interests,  I  cannot 
think  of a  single  issue  in  this  category  in  Levittown's  short  his-
tory.  A  clear  case  of  the  absolute  holistic  public  interest  is  the 
survival of the community and all its residents, and martial law is 
readily  invoked  in dealing with a  natural disaster.  But other  in-
stances are  hard  to  find.  If the community as  municipality went 
bankrupt,  and  if  state  or  federal  funds  were  not  available  to 
rescue  it,  one  could  argue  for  a  drastic  tax  increase,  although 
even then one might want to give residents the alternative of dis-
banding  the community  altogether.  Conversely,  the  holistic  in-
terest  does  not justify  repression  of riots.  It (and  the  consensual 
interest)  allows actions to prevent bloodshed,  but rioting itself is 

Politics  and  Planning 

clearly  a  desperate  method  of  minority  intervention  when  the 
government  has  been  insufficiently  responsive,  and  must  be 
treated as a  political  issue,  to be  resolved  by eliminating commu-
nity-based  grievances. 50  The  relative  holistic  public  interest  is 
hardest  to  determine,  for  it requires  the  comparison  of benefits 
and  costs  to  the  community as  a  whole  with  those  of  people  as 
community  members  and  individuals.  But  the  most  important 
benefits and costs are almost impossible to measure. 

The public interest is  so  easy  to  claim and so  difficult to deter-
mine  that  once  one  proceeds  beyond  consensus  and  community 
survival,  the  pluralism  of American  society  soon  interferes  with 
the assumptions of value  agreement and value  priority  inherent 
in  the  two  kinds  of  public  interest.  Communities  could,  of 
course, go  through  the complicated  process  of determining what 
values  its  members share  and what community values are  so  im-
portant that they outweigh all others, but populations and values 
are  not  always  stable.  Perhaps  the  only  solution  is  to  put  one's 
faith  in  the  local  political  process  (assuming  it  is  genuinely 
democratic),  letting  decision-makers  and  interveners  use  their 
conception  of  the  public  interest  as  a  campaign  or ·intervention 
strategy,  and hoping that the voters will opt for  the  public inter-
est as  they see it. 

A  special  case  of  the  public  interest  is  the  community's  long-
range  development,  which  requires  a  determination  of  whether 
future consensual or holistic public interest is  important enough 
to  justify  short-range  sacrifices.  I  would  argue  that  long-range 
needs  deserve  implementation  if  there  is  substantial  proof  that 
they  accord  with  present  public  interest  or  majority  values,  but 
that it is  unwise to give up important current priorities for goals 
in  the uncertain future.  Some needs can be proven;  present pop-
ulation  data  provide  unmistakable  evidence  of  the  need  for  fu-
ture  classrooms,  but a  long-range  land  acquisition  program  for 
local  suburban  parks  would  require  some  evidence  that  such 
parks will be used adequately; otherwise,  the money might better 
be spent for other needs. Of course, land can always  be purchased 
by the government and later turned to other uses  or even sold to 
private  developers,  but  given  low  suburban  densities,  I  would 
doubt whether the demand for future park use  is  high enough to 
divert money now, say,  from building more;: classrooms and estab-
lishing smaller  classes.  ~ong-range planning (which  demands no 
significant  current sacrifices)  is  always  desirable,  provided  it  ad-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

dresses  itself to issues of the kind I  have described, rather than to 
the  realization  of  minority  demands  in  the  guise  of  long-range 
thinking. 

Minority interests must be divided  into demands and rights.  In 
a  genuinely  democratic  community,  minority  demands  have 
lower  priority than  those  of the  majority, although  the  ideal  is  a 
compromise  that  optimizes  the  achievement  of  both.  When  it 
comes to  minority rights, however,  the line must be drawn firmly 
and  their  priority  over  majority  values  must  be  asserted.  Such 
rights are guaranteed  by  the  Constitution, and  whether  they  are 
those  of  nonwhite  people  to  live  where  they  choose  or  of  indi-
viduals  with  deviant  opinions  to  utter  them  freely,  they  cannot 
be abrogated by the community. 

Up  to  this  point,  the  argument  has  assumed  local  autonomy: 
that the public interest and the definition of majority and minor-
ity  are  determined  by  the  boundaries  of  the  local  community. 
That  assumption  is  justified  on  issues  affecting  only  the  people 
living  within  these  boundaries,  but  these  are  increasingly  rare. 
When so  much of community life  is  shaped by forces  and agents 
impinging  from  the  outside,  no  community  can  be  an  island. 
This  is  particularly  true  of  suburbs,  whose  political  boundaries 
were drawn in rural times and are constantly ::rossed by the social 
and economic forces  that make  them  interdependent  with cities. 
The  principle  of majority  rule alone  would  justify that  the  ma-
jority demands or the public interest of the larger area take prec-
edence  over  the  community;  but  what  might  be  true  in  theory 
breaks down  in  practice,  for  there are  few  political  units or gov-
ernmental  bodies  with  enough  authority  or  power  to  act  in  be-
half of metropolitan  areas  or  the  social  and  economic regions  to 
which  cities  and  suburbs  belong.  The  limitations  of  the  local 
community  and  the  artificiality  of  its  boundaries  are  obvious 
enough,  but  this  does  not  thereby  generate  the  political  power 
needed  to  establish  new  governmental  bodies.  So  long  as  local 
government's  prime  function  is  to  protect  property  and  status 
values,  voters  will  not support  metropolitan  or  regional  govern-
ments.  Consequently,  state  and  federal  governments  are  pres-
ently the major resource for outside intervention. 

The Case  for  Outside Intervention 

I  pointed  out  earlier  that  the  most  important  ingredient  for 
nonpolitical  decisions  was  outside  power,  and  when  this  was 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  401  • 

exerted,  Levittown's  decision-makers  acted  accordingly  despite 
strong local  political  pressures  to act otherwise.  State and federal 
action are  therefore most effective  for  realizing what are  by local 
standards nonpolitical decisions.  Admittedly, such action  is  polit-
ical  as  well  and  depends  ultimately  on  voter  approval,  but  it  is 
easier  to  obtain  at  the  state  and  federal  levels  than  at  the  local 
level.  The  final  question  then  is:  How  much  and  what  kind  of 
outside intervention is  desirable in the  local  community? 

Generally  speaking,  outside  agencies  ought  to  be  empowered 
to  carry  out  the  local  (and  the  extra-local)  public  interest  when 
the  local  community  is  unwilling  to  do  so.  Similarly,  they  must 
enforce  the  minority  rights  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution  and 
by  federal  and  state  laws.  Yet  another  function  is  to  help  local 
minorities  attain  their  demands.  If a  minority  of  Levittowners 
wanted a  more cosmopolitan  school,  outside aid would  be  desir-
able  to  enable  the  local  school  board  to  provide  it  as  part of  its 
system  or as  a  separate school.  Such a  solution  is  possible  only if 
the  minority demand does  not conflict  with  the  majority  one;  it 
would  not work  for  a  minority wanting to  drive  on  the  left side 
of the street.  More important, since not all minority demands can 
be  satisfied  from  the  outside,  criteria  are  needed  for  choosing 
those  deserving  of  outside  financial  aid  or  political  support. 
Three such  criteria can  be advanced,  two  related  to  the commu-
nity, and one external to it. 

The first  is  the correction of the imbalances and inequities that 
result  from  local  autonomy  and  majority  rule.  Outside  power 
and aid should be used to satisfy those demands which can be met 
through  governmental  action,  provided  they  cannot  be  satisfied 
privately  by  these  minorities,  and  provided,  also,  the  minorities 
represent a  significant enough proportion of the community.  For 
example,  a  minority  which  cannot  afford  to  pay  for  its  need~ in 
the  private  economy  deserves  governmental  aid  before  a  more 
affluent  one,  for  government  ought wherever  possible  to  correct 
the  inequities of the  private economy.  But since  it cannot satisfy 
all  demands,  it  ought  also  to  give  priority  to  those  of  a  larger 
minority than  before tho~e of a  smaller one.  A second criterion is 
the outside correction  of local  irrationality.  Short-range  political 
considerations encourage local  governments to find  stop-gap solu-
tions,  but  an  outside  agency  can  demand  rational  ones  in  ex-
change  for  financial  aid.  For  example,  if  it  proposes  to  help 
eliminate juvenile delinquency, it can more easily set standards to 

•  402  • 

THE  LEVlTTOWNERS 

assure  programs that aid adolescents and to discourage  irrational 
adult repression. 

But given the shortcomings of local democracy and the limited 
role of local  communities in  the lives of their residents,  the most 
important  criterion  must  be  external:  the  goals  of  the  outside 
agency itself.  A  state agency ought  to  use  its  funds  and authority 
to  achieve  state  aims;  a  federal  one,  federal  aims.  The  federal 
government  usually  has  a  broader  perspective  than  the  local 
community,  as  well  as  more  power  to  correct  its  shortcomings, 
and  most state  go,·ernments should be  in a  similar position after 
reapportionment.  They  are  able  to  see  that  regional  needs  may 
require  apartments  in  single-family  home  suburbs,  or  that  the 
automating economy demands changes in local schools. Of course, 
outside  agencies  pursue  their  own  political  and  bureaucratic 
priorities  before  attending  to  more  general  state  or  national 
goals,  and  the  ideal  is  a  state  (and national)  plan  that sets  priori-
ties  for  what  local  facilities  and  services  are  to  be  affected  and 
subsidized by the state or federal  government.  Such  a  plan would 
enable the federal  government to decide,  for example,  that given 
the prospective changes in the economy and its job structure, edu-
cational subsidies to a suburban school system are more important 
than  recreational  subsidies,  but  that  if  work  time  is  reduced  a 
generation  hence,  recreational  ones  may  become  more  urgent 
than  others;  or  that subsidies  to  suburbs are  less  important than 
to the cities and  their low-income populations. 

Like  all  arguments  for  planning,  mine  ultimately  requires  a 
central  national  plan  which  determines  what  goals  and  policies 
are of highest priority. But central  planning requires a consensus 
on  national  goals  and  needs,  and  agreement  about  the  shape  of 
the future,  and  these are  hard to achieve.  The increasing role  of 
the  federal  government  in  the  affairs  of  local  communities  sug-
gests  that  such  a  plan  will  be  developed  eventually,  if  only  to 
guide the federal  Bureau of the Budget in its allocation decisions. 
Nor is  such a  plan as  impossible as  it seems, for on those issues on 
which  consensus  is  lacking,  the goals  of a  pluralistic  society  sug-
gest  that the demands of different groups ought  to be satisfied as 
much as  possible. If they know what they want,  these wants are at 
least given.  When  unanimity  is  not  possible,  the  best solution  is 
to encourage diversity. 

I  have  tried  to  argue  that  as  long  as  local  governments  make 
predominantly political  decisions,  outside  agencies  must require 

Politics  and  Planning 

•  403  • 

or  encourage  the. local  community  to  make  nonpolitical  ones. 
Even  then,  opportunities for  local  planning will  be  limited,  but 
national  planning for  local  communities may  be  feasible.  Given 
the  increasing  interdependence  of  the  local  community and  the 
national  society,  and  the  relative  insignificance  of local  commu-
nities in the lives  of their residents,  outside agencies are justified 
in  protecting the  public interest and  minority rights,  in looking 
after  minority  demands,  and  in  implementing  regional,  state, 
and federal  priorities. 

In  corning  to  this  conclusion,  I  have  proposed  a  number  of 
absolute  values  which  take  precedence  over  the  workings  of  the 
political process and limit majority rule. The fundamental  philo-
sophical  problem  remains:  once  politics,  democracy,  and  major-
ity rule are accepted,  it is difficult  to insist on exceptions, for who 
is  to say-and by  what  external  criterion-which absolutes  take 
precedence.  In  a  democratic  society  which  is  also  pluralistic, 
every  act  and  every  value  must  become  political,  and  seemingly 
nonpolitical  absolutes  may  only  reflect  the  interests  of  one  or 
another  sector  of  the  population.  If one's  choice  of  absolutes  is 
itself  political,  depending  on  the  values  of  whatever  economic, 
cultural,  or philosophical  interest group one belongs  to,  then so-
cial  scientists  or  cosmopolitans  are  likely  to  insist  on  absolutes 
different  from  those  of  low-income  Negroes,  for  example.  The 
search  for  truly  nonpolitical  absolutes  must  go  on,  but  it  may 
well  be that none exist beyond the survival  of the individual, the 
community, or the  nation.  Then, one can only  insist  on a  single 
absolute;  a  genuinely  democratic  society.  The  virtue  of  such  a 
society  is  that  it  gives  one  the  right  to  fight  politically  for  the 
other absolutes of one's  choice;  the  drawback,  that  if one  knows 
oneself  to  be  in  a  minority,  these  absolutes  are  not  likely  to  be 
accepted  by  the  majority. 

NOTES 

1.  I define rationality here  as  the determination of the most effective 
means  of  achieving  a  stated  goal;  it  refers  to  the  methods  for 
bringing  about  a  goal  rather  than  to  the  choice  of  goals  or  the 
process  of determining  this  choice. 

2.  Although I use  the terms "desegregation"  and "integration" inter-
changeably  for  styli~tic reasons,  I  am  describing how  Negroes  ob-

•  404  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

tained the right to purchase houses in the community, rather than 
their  social  integration  in to  it. 

3·  Bressler,  p.  127. 
4·  This assumption turned out to be inaccurate, for when Levittown 
was integrated,  the salesmen of smaller subdivisions  told potential 
customers  hair-raising  and  totally  inaccurate  stories  about  the 
amount  of  integration,  conflict,  violence,  and  blight  that  had 
taken  place,  promising  them  that  the  small  subdivisions  would 
remain  totally  white.  Eventually,  SDAD  acted  to  halt  this  prac-
tice,  an<.!  the  Burlington County  Human  Relations Council made 
special  efforts  to  find  Negro  buyers  for every  small subdivision  in 
the area. 

5·  As  I  pointed out in Chapter Two,  1 per cent of the  buyers (3  per 
cent from  the cities)  volunteered racial  change  as  their main  rea-
son  for  leaving  their  former  residence,  and  g  per  cent  (about  a 
fifth  of  city  dwellers)  checked  it  as  an  important  reason  on  a 
fifteen-item  list. 

6.  Not  all  Jews  supported  desegregation.  I  was  personally  quite 
shaken  by  a  bitter  attack  on  it  by  a  Jewish  leader  who  had  sur-
vived the German concentration camps. The majority Jewish view 
was  probably like  that of one Levittowner,  who  told  me,  "I don't 
want Negroes in Levittown, and I don't want Jews associated with 
interracial  attempts,  but I  won't  picket.  We  are  a  minority  too." 
7·  A  door-to-door  survey  made  by  a  local  paper  with  a  more  ran-
domly chosen sample than is  usually  the case showed that in  1959. 
sixteen  Levittowners  interviewed  were  opposed  to  integration, 
while only  two  favored  it. 

8.  Fears of intermarriage undoubtedly also fed on the powerful white 

fantasy  about  Negro  sexual  potency. 

g.  Also,  some  lawyers  felt  that he had a good case  for  his  interpreta-
tion  of  FHA  insurance  and  that  it  might  be  upheld  by  the  U.S. 
Supreme Court. 

10.  Later, a company official explained to me that if the state Supreme 
Court  should  unexpectedly  find  for  Levitt,  the  company  could 
always  reverse  itself  and  not  sell  to  Negroes.  In  July  1g6o,  the 
court  ruled  8  to  o  against  Levitt,  however,  and  since  Levittown 
had  by  then  been  desegregated  peacefully,  the  firm  did  not  take 
the  case  to  the  U.S.  Supreme Court. 

11.  Despite  the lack of violence,  the disturbance and integration split 
the  community  politically  for  several  years.  The  effects  of  the 
disturbance  are  described  by  Bressler. 

12.  For  another  report  on  Levittown's  integration,  prepared  by  the 

consultant, see  U.S.  House and Home Finance Agency. 

13.  The politicians had been burned the previous year by cooperating 
with  Levitt  on  the  liquor  issue  and  the  name  change,  and  were 
loath  to  help out again,  especially  on  this  seemingly  more explo-
sive  issue. 

14·  Reluctance  about  integration  came from  ministers  whose  congre-

Politics  and  Planning 

gants  wete  of  lower  socioeconomic  status,  especially  the  funda-
mentalist  ones.  Interestingly  enough,  the  decision  to  announce 
integration  on  a  Sunday  left  out  the  two  rabbis,  for  they  would 
not  meet  their  congregations  again  until  the  following  Friday. 
Evidently no one was  much concerned about opposition from  the 
Jewish  community. 

15.  On  the  other hand,  township  officials  made  sure  that  people  op-
posed  to or ambivalent about integration  were  abo seated on  the 
Council,  for  they  feared  that  they  and  the  Council  would  other-
wise  be described  as  tools of  the  integrationists.  Anti-integration-
ists  were,  however,  outnumbered in  the  Council. 
16.  U.S.  Housing  and  Home  Finance  Agency,  p.  23. 
17.  The survey showed that only  11  per cent of all prospects indicated 
any  interest  in  the  question  of  racial  occupancy.  Furthermore,  4 
per cent registered  mild disapproval,  2.4  per cent were  unwilling 
to buy a house next to a Negro family,  and only 1.7 per cent "gave 
evidence of holding uncompromising views in opposition to racial 
inclusion and therefore might be considered to be 'lost' prospects." 
U.S.  Housing and Home Finance Agency,  p.  23. 

18.  Since  the  private  lots  were  more  desirable  and  slightly  more  ex-
pensive,  they  also had  a  higher resale  value.  This not only  made 
them  easier  to  resell,  but  also  prevented  generalizations  that 
Negroes  reduced  property  values  and  resale  prices. 

19.  This figure  was  reported  to  me  by  a  sales  manager and  includes 
some who changed their mind for  reasons other than  the color of 
their  neighbors. 

20.  A  May  1963  survey  showed  that  only  three  houses  were  vacant 
adjacent  to  the  32  Negro  families.  U.S.  Housing  and  Home  Fi-
nance Agency,  P- 19. 

21.  The  experts  were  ineffectu<ll  also  because  it  was  thought  they 
were  hired  by  the  builder  to  "brainwash"'  opposition  to  his  de-
cision,  because  they  were  outsiders  and  ignorant  of  local  condi-
tions-many  describing  Levittown  as  culturally  and  socially  ho-
mogeneous-and  became  they  talked  down  to  the  audience.  The 
only  lecturer  to  make  a  favorable  impression  was  a  Negro  social 
worker  who,  according  to  one participant,  "gave  us  the  facts  and 
no  propaganda."  He  was  dark-skinned  (thus  providing  many 
Levittowners  their  first  opportunity  to  meet  "a  really  black  Ne-
gro"),  talked  in  a  mild  tone,  and  was  not  insistent  on  attitude 
change. 

22.  Neighbor social  pressure not  to  sell  to  Negroes  was  quite  intense. 
When  I  prepared  to  sell  my  own  house,  I  was  made  aware  that 
most  of  my  neighbors  were  opposed  to  integration.  Since  I  was 
friendly  with  many  pro-integration  leaders,  a  rumor  swept  my 
block  that  I  had  sold  my  house  to  a  Negro  family.  Although  I 
thought  about  doing  so,  I  decided  not  to,  mainly  because  I 
planned  to  continue  the  fieldwork  for  another  year  and  felt  it 
would  be  endangered. 

•  406  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

23.  One  of  the  two  resales  to  a  Negro  family  had  earlier  been  listed 
with  a  local  realtor  who  had  forgotten  to  take  down  his  sign. 
When he heard that the house had been  sold  to a  Negro,  he hur-
riedly  removed  his  sign,  but  for  a  while  his  competitors gleefully 
spread  the false  rumor  that he  had been  responsible  for  the  sale. 
24.  A comparison of the number of move-ins during the same months 
of 1959 and 1g6o  shows  that from January to March 1960, arrivals 
were  50  per  cent  of  those  in  the  same  months  in  1959.  Between 
April and June, when integration had been  announced,  they  rose 
to 106  per cent of 1959  arrivals;  but between July and September, 
they  dropped  to  40  per cent  and  from  October  to  January  to  45 
per cent of the preceding year's arrivals.  This was  only 5  per cent 
less  than in the three months preceding the  integration announce-
ment,  however. 

25.  In  the  last  half of  1958  Levitt  had  sold  487  homes,  and  in  1959, 
2174,  but in 1g6o sales dropped to 848;  in  1961,  to 729;  in  1962,  to 
575;  in  1963,  to  416;  and  in  1964,  to  a  low  of  336.  In  1965  and 
1966  sales  began to rise  again,  to about 8oo per year. 

26.  The federal  study of  Levittown's integration  came  to  no definite 
conclusion about the impact of integration on sales.  U.S.  Housing 
and  Home Finance Agency,  pp.  17-19. 

27.  In  1966,  William  Levitt  testified  personally  and  enthusiastically 
before  the  Congress  in  favor  of  an  open-occupancy  clause  in  the 
1966  Civil  Rights  Act,  arguing  as  he  had  in  the  past  that  no 
builder  will  desegregate  his  community  unless  all  builders  are 
required  to do so. 

28.  U.S.  Housing and Home Finance Agency,  pp.  21-22. 
29.  Bressler,  p.  33· 
30.  Indeed,  I  doubt  whether more  than  1  or 2  per cent of  the  white 
adult population has ever met any of the  Negro  Levittowners. 
31.  Of course,  it could be argued  that initial  integration  would  have 
discouraged  militantly  segregationist  purchasers,  which  in  turn 
might have attracted more Negroes.  But  the latter could not have 
known  this;  besides,  hostility  toward  them  would have  come  not 
from  the  militants,  but  from  a  community  climate  which  per-
mitted  the militants  to express  their opposition.  The community 
climate might have  been  poorer if  more  Negroes  had  purchased, 
although their number would have had to increase tenfold  before 
it would have deteriorated significantly.  Actually, so  few  Negroes 
can  afford  to  buy in Levittown  that I  doubt whether initial  inte-
gration would have  increased  their numbers materially. 

32.  The main,  Levitt-owned,  center was  built in  contemporary  style, 
however,  since  the idea  for  Colonial  elevations  was  not  proposed 
until  after it had  been  started. 

33·  See  Township  of  Willingboro.  For  unfathomable  reasons,  most 
master  plans  begin  with  a  community  description  which  is  writ-
ten,  not  for  the  residents  who  must  pass  on  the  plan,  but  for 
someone  who  has  never  been  in  the  community. 

Politics  and  Planning 

34·  Willingboro  Township  Planning  Board,  p.  1. 
35·  For example, two of the ten objectives deal with shopping centers, 
a  subject on  which  the  planning consultant had strong beliefs. 
36.  The  objectives  are  quoted,  in  order  of  their  presentation  from 
Willingboro Township Planning Board, pp. 12-13. Those omitted 
here  are  either  obvious  or  deal  with  minor  and  local  technical 
matters. 

37·  Willingboro Township Planning Board,  p.  25. 
38.  Willingboro  Township  Planning  Board,  p.  21. 
39·  Actually, by  the time  the plan came out, almost all  the Route  130 
frontage  was  developed  with strip shopping,  and  the consultant's 
proposal could only have been implemented by  tearing it all down 
and starting over.  He did not suggest  this,  however. 

40.  Township of Willingboro,  p. 74· 
41.  Willingboro Township  Planning  Board,  p.  21. 
42.  Willingboro  Township  Planning Board,  p.  14. 
43·  Levitt"s original plan was  to build at least  12,000  houses for  about 
50,000  people,  and  another  4000  houses  if  the  market  held  up. 
Evidently  the  planner has  accepted  Levitt's minimum projection. 

44·  Willingboro  Township  Planning  Board,  p.  16. 
45·  Willingboro Township  Planning  Board,  p.  17. 
46.  Rondum.  Emphases  and  parenthenthetical  phrases  hers. 
47·  Willingboro  Township  Planning  Board,  p.  21. 
48.  For a  more detailed case study of such  deficiencies,  see  Piven, and 

Altshuler, Part I. 

49·  For a  more detailed discussion  of types  of public interest concep-
tions,  to  which  my  own  analysis  is  heavily  indebted,  see  Banfield 
(1955),  pp.  322-330.  Banfield  distinguishes  between  the  com-
munalist  public  interest,  involving  ends  which  community  mem-
bers share as  community members,  and  the individualistic public 
interest, involving ends which  community members share as  indi-
viduals  (pp.  323-324).  Since  both  conceptions  require  consensus, 
I  have  lumped  them  here,  although  people's  interests  as  com-
munity members may conflict with those  they hold as  individuals. 
50.  Even  looting  can  be  interpreted  justifiably  as  a  method  of  eco-
nomic  intervention,  to  make  up for  the  lack  of equitable  income 
distribution and  responsiveness  in  the  economic system. 

Chapter Fifteen 

LEVITTOWN  AND  AMERICA 

D 

D 

D 

D 

I  BEGAN  THIS STUDY  WITH  FOUR  QUESTIONS,  THE  ANSWERS  TO  WHICH 
can  be  generalized  to  new  towns  and  suburbs  all  over  America. 
First,  a  new  community  is  shaped  neither  by  the  builder,  the 
planner,  and  the  organizational  founder,  nor  by  the  aspirations 
with  which  residents  come.  A  builder  creates  the  physical  shell 
of  the community;  a  founder,  the  social  one;  but even  when  or-
ganizations  and  institutions are  initiated  by  national  bodies out-
side  the  community,  they  can  only  survive  by  attracting  people 
and responding  to  their demands.  If resirlents  lack  choice among 
churches  or  clubs,  individual  founders  can  impose  their  will  or 
their vision of the community  on  the  residents,  but such  lack  of 
choice  is  rare.  Aspirations of residents  are  usually  limited  to  the 
house,  family  life,  neighboring,  and friendship;  people  ha\'e  few 
that concern  the  larger  community  aJld  the  demands  they  make 
on it emerge after they have  settled down.  Only  when  they  have 
lived on  their blocks for  a  while  can  they decide  what  functions 
must be filled  by the rest of  the community,  and only  when  they 
have  met  their  fellow  residents  can  they  determine  where  com-
patible people  are to be found  and  how  they want  to  sort  them-
selves.  In short, their choices of  (and  within) community  institu· 
tions  are  basically  a  function  of  the  population  mix  they  en-
counter. 

These choices  are  not made  in  a  vacuum,  but  involve  values 
and preferences which  people bring with them.  Perhaps the most 
significant fact  about  the origin of a  new community is  that  it  is 

•  408  • 

Levittown  and  America 

not new at all,  but only a  new  physical  site  on which  people de-
velop  conventional  institutions  with  traditional  programs.  New 
towns  are  ultimately  old  communities  on  new  land,  culturally 
not significantly different from  suburban subdivisions and urban 
neighborhoods inhabited by the same kinds of people, and politi-
cally much like other small American towns. 

Second,  most  new  suburbanites  are  pleased  with  the  commu-
nity  that develops;  they enjoy  the  house and  outdoor living and 
take  pleasure  from  the  large  supply  of compatible  people,  with-
out  experiencing  the  boredom  or  malaise  ascribed  to  suf)urban 
homogeneity.  Some  people  encounter  unexpected  social  isola-
tion,  particularly  those  who  differ  from  the  majority  of  their 
neighbors.  Who will  be socially  isolated depends on  the commu-
nity;  in  Levittown,  they  were  older  couples,  the  well  educated 
and  the  poorly  educated,  and  women  who  had  come  from  a  co-
hesive working class or ethnic enclave or were used to living with 
an extended family.  Such people probably suffer in every suburb; 
even though they want to escape from  the close  life of the "urban 
village,"  they  miss  their old haunts, cannot fmd  compatible peo-
ple,  or  do  not  know  how  to  make  new  friends.  But  the  least 
happy  people  are always  those  of lowest  income and  least  educa-
tion;  they not only have  the most difficulty  in making social  con-
tacts and joining groups,  but are also  beset by financial  problems 
which strain family  tempers as  well  as  family  budgets.  And  if the 
suburb is  designed for young adults and children, the adolescents 
w'il.l  suffer from  "nothing to do" and from  adult hostility toward 
their youth culture and peer groups. 

People's lives are changed somewhat by  the move  to suburbia, 
but  their  basic  ways  remain  the  same;  they  do  not develop  new 
life  styles  or ambitions  for  themselves  and  their children.  More-
over,  many of  the changes  that do take place were desired  before 
the  move.  Because  the  suburb makes  them  possible,  morale goes 
up,  boredom  and  loneliness  are  reduced,  family  life  becomes 
temporarily  more  cohesive,  social  and  organizational  activities 
multiply,  and  spare-time  pursuits  now  concentrate  on  the  house 
and yard.  Some changes result from  the move:  community organ-
izational  needs encourage some  people  to  become joiners for  the 
first  time,  ethnic  and  religious  difference  demands  more  syna-
gogue  attendance,  and  social  isolation  breeds  depression,  bore-
dom,  and  loneliness for  the  few  who  are  left  out.  But change  is 
not  unidirectional;  different  people  respond  differently  to  the 

•  410  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

new environment, and the most undesirable changes usually stem 
from familial and occupational circumstances. 

Third,  the sources or causes  of change are  not  to  be  found  in 
suburbia per se,  but in the  new house,  the opportunity for home 
ownership, and  above  all,  the  population mix-the people  with 
whom one  now  lives.  They bring about  the intended  increase  in 
social  life,  the  unintended  increase  in  organizational  activity, 
and,  of  course,  the  equally  unintended  social  isolation.  Some 
changes can  be traced  to the openness of the social  structure in a 
new community and people's willingness to accept and trust each 
other,  as  well  as  to  the  random  settling  pattern  which  requires 
them  to  make  friends  with  strangers  next  door  or  to  leave  the 
block  for  the  larger  community  to  find  compatible  people.  But 
most  result  from  the  homogeneity  of  age  and class  of  the popu-
lation  that buys  into a  new  suburb.  Indeed,  the  basic sources  of 
change  come  from  goals  for  home  ownership,  a  free-standing 
house,  outdoor  living,  and being with  people  of similar age  and 
class, which have long been basic aspirations of American working 
and  middle  class  cultures. 1  Even  unintended  changes  could  be 
traced  finally  to  national  economic  trends  and  cultural  patterns 
that push people out of  the city and provide  incentives for  build-
ers  to  construct  communities  like  Levittown.  Ultimately,  then, 
the changes people undergo  in  the move  to the suburbs are only 
expressions of more widespread societal changes and national cul-
tural goals. 

Fourth,  the  politics  of  a  new  suburb  is  no  more  distinctive 
than  the  rest  of  its  life.· In  any  heterogeneous  community,  con-
flicting  demands  from  the voters  force  the decision-makers  to  set 
up a  performing government  which  observes  democratic  norms, 
freeing  them  to  reconcile  these  conflicts  in  a  backstage  actual 
government. Their decisions are, more often than not, responsive 
to the majority of voters when that majority makes demands,  but 
are unresponsive to powerless minorities, which therefore have to 
intervene-to upset  the  normal decision-making process  in order 
to  get  satisfaction.  Since  they  fail  more  often  than  they  succeed, 
local  government  generally  neglects  minority  demands  and 
rights, and the public interest as well.  Experts with sufficient con-
sensus, skill,  and power can implement decisions unpopular with 
the  majority,  but  on  the  whole,  such  decisions  have  to  be  en-
forced  by  nonlocal  agencies.  Of course,  suburbs  like  Levittown 
have  few  of  the  problems  that  face  American  cities,  dying small 

LeviUown  and  America 

•  4U  • 

towns, or stagnant rural areas, so that local governments can meet 
the  limited  needs  of at least  their dominant  constituents.  Supra-
local  governments must  be developed,  however,  to deal  with  the 
problems generated by the myriad of suburban sovereignties and 
the artificiality of suburban boundaries. 

THE  POTENTIAL  FOR  INNOVATION  AND  CHANGE 

My four  initial  questions  were  joined by  a  common  theme:  To 
what extent is a community made by its residents and to what ex-
tent  by  leaders,  planners,  and  other experts  who  want  to  stimu-
late innovation and  change? The findings,  I  would suggest,  dem-
onstrate  again  an  important  sociological  truth  and  truism,  that 
what happens in a community is  almost always a  reflection  of the 
people  who  live  in  it,  especially  the  numerical  and cultural  ma-
jority. That majority  supports  the  organizations and  institutions 
that  define  the  community;  it determines  who  will  be  enjoying 
life  and  who  will  be  socially  isolated;  and  it  forms  the  constit-
uencies  to which decision-makers are responsive.  In the last anal-
ysis,  then,  the community (and it origin, impact, and politics) are 
an  outcome  of  the  population  mix,  particularly  of its  dominant 
elements and their social structure and culture. 

The  processes  by  which  this  community  outcome  is  achieved 
are  conflict-ridden.  A  modern  community  is  not  like  a  folk  cul-
ture, in which congruence between  the community and  its  popu-
lation  is  achieved by a  widespread consensus about behavior and 
values.  In  Levittown,  the congruence is  much less  perfect, and is 
produced  by  power  struggles,  which  are  constantly  resolved  by 
compromises  so  that  institutions  and  organizations can  function 
in  an  orderly  manner.  These  struggles  are  unending,  for  every 
compromise  solves  only  the  immediate  conflict,  and  new  issues 
arise all the time. Whether the compromisers are parents, organi-
zational  leaders,  or  elected  officials,  they  spend  a  great  deal  of 
time  and  energy  in averting what  they define  as  crises,  and  pre-
serving  the  fragile  equilibrium  by  which  congruence  between 
community and society  is  engineered. As  a  result, all  other issues 
are  pushed  into  the  background,  including  innovation  and 
change.  And  when  decision-makers  cannot  satisfy  everybody, 
there  is  rarely  time  or  energy  for  any  but  the  most  numerous, 
powerh,1l, or vocal constituents. 

Under  these  conditions,  founders,  innovators,  and  individual 

•  412  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

"change  agents,"  expert  or  otherwise,  can  do  little.  They  may 
suggest  new  ideas,  but  before  these  are  implemented,  they  have 
been  altered  to  make  them  responsive  to  important  constitu-
encies.  'Without  initiators,  nothing  can  begin,  but  once  the 
initiative  has  been  taken,  the social  process transforms it.  People 
who  can  initiate  successfully  and  anticipate  the  required  trans-
formations are made leaders and often get credit for  the workings 
of  the  social  process-and  those  who  want  to  be  leaders  learn 
quickly  what  will  be  successful.  Only  rarely  is  such  a  role 
awarded to innovators. 

These  findings  could  easily  be  used  to  justify  the  status  quo, 
but that  is  not my conclusion  or my  purpose.  The study suggests 
that  change  and  innovation  are  always  possible,  but  not  easily 
achieved.  No  group  or community  is  impervious  to  c~ange, but 
neither  is  it  an  aggregate  of  open-minded  people  who  do  not 
know  what  they  want  and  can  be  persuaded  to  shed  their  past. 
Consequently, advocates of innovation and change cannot be sat-
isfied  (as  they so  often are)  with appealing for  something new or 
by demanding conformity to  their ideas  (as  they  so  often do)  be-
cause they are convinced of  the superiority of what  they propose. 
Groups and communities are fluid systems,  with leaders who have 
some-but precious little-leeway  in  their decisions. If that  lee-
way  is  to  be  used  for  innovation,  change  agents  who  lack  the 
·power to  insist  on change  or the resources  with which to  reward 
people  for  undertaking  it  must  offer  distinctly  superior  alterna-
tives  to  present  arrangements.  No  community and  no  social  ar-
rangement satisfies everyone, and as  the data on Levittown make 
persuasively  evident,  even  when  most  people  are  happy  with 
their  new  community,  some  are  not.  The  best  approach  to 
change,  therefore,  is  to give  up  the  single  solution  that compro-
mises  between  the  wants  of  different groups,  and  to  experiment 
with  new  solutions  for  dissatisfied  groups  and  cultures  in  the 
total  population.  This  means  a  diversity  of  housing,  living  ar-
rangements,  and  institutions, either within the  same community 
or in separate ones,  keyed to the diversity of background, culture, 
and aspirations relevant to community life. 

Conflict,  Pluralism,  and Community 

Although  a  part of my study was  concerned with  the  possibil-
ities  of  change  and  innovation,  I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that 
Levittown  is  badly in  need  of  either.  The  community  may  dis· 
please  the professional  city planner and the  intellectual  defender 

Levittown  and  America 

•  413  • 

of cosmopolitan culture,  but perhaps more than any other type of 
community,  Levittown  permits  most of  its  residents  to  be  what 
they want to  be-to center  their lives  around  the  home and  the 
family,  to  be  among  nei:;hbors  whom  they  can  trust,  to  find 
friends  to share leisure hours,  and  to  participate in organizations 
that  provide  sociability  and  the  opportunity to  be  of  service  to 
others. 

That Levittown has  its faults  and problems  is  undeniable, and 
I  have  described  them  in  previous chapters:  physical  and  social 
isolation,  familial  and  governmental  financial  problems,  insuffi-
cient public  transportation,  less  than  perfect  provision  of  public 
services,  inadequate decision-making and feedback processes,  lack 
of  representation  for  minorities  and  overrepresentation  for  the 
builder, and the entire array of familial  and individual problems 
common to any population.  Many of them can be traced  back  to 
three  basic  shortcomings,  none  distinctive  to  Levittown  or  the 
Levittowners. 

One is the difficulty of coping with conflict.  Like  the rest of the 
country,  Levittown  is  beset  with  conflict:  class  conflict  between 
the lower middle class group and  the smaller working and upper 
middle  class  groups;  generational  conflict  between  adults,  chil· 
dren, adolescents, and the elderly.  The existence of conflict  is  no 
drawback,  but the  way  conflict  is  handled  leaves  much  to  be  de-
sired.  Levittowners,  like  other  Americans,  do  not  really  accept 
the inevitability of conflict.  Insisting that a consensus  is  possible, 
they  only  exacerbate  the  conflict,  for  each  group  demands  that 
the  other conform  to  its  values  and  accept  its  priorities.  When 
power is a  valuable prize and resources are scarce, such a  perspec· 
tive  is  understandable,  but in  Levittown  the exercise  of power is 
not an end in itself for most people;  they want  it mainly  to  con-
trol  the allocation of resources.  Since  resources  are  not so  scarce, 
however,  the  classes  and  age  groups  could  resolve  their  conflicts 
more constructively tban they do, giving each group at least some 
of what it wants.  If the inevitability of conflicting  interests  were 
accepted,  differences  might  be  less  threatening,  and  this  would 
make  it  easier  to  reach  the  needed  compromises.  I  am  not 
sanguine  that  this  will  happen,  for  if  people  think resources  are 
scarce,  they act as  if they are scarce, and will  not pay an extra $20 
a  year  in  taxes  to  implement minority demands.  Even  so,  condi-
tions  to make  viable compromises  happen are more favorable  in 
Levittown than in larger or poorer communities. 

The second shortcoming, closely  related  to  the  first,  is  the jna-

•  41 4  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

bility  to  deal  with pluralism.  People  have  not recognized  the di-
versity of American society, and they are not able to accept other 
life  styles.  Indeed,  they cannot  handle conflict because  they  can-
not accept pluralism. Adults are unwilling to tolerate adolescent 
culture,  and  vice  versa.  Lower  middle  class  people  oppose  the 
ways  of  the  working  class  and  upper  middle  class,  and  each  of 
these  groups  is  hostile  to  the other two.  Perhaps  the  inability to 
cope  with  pluralism  is  greater  in  Levittown  than  elsewhere  be-
cause  it  is  a  community  of  young  families  who  are  raising  chil-
dren.  Children are essentially asocial  and unacculturated beings, 
easily  influenced  by  new  ideas.  As  a  result,  their  parents  feel  an 
intense  need  to  defend  familial  values;  to  make  sure  that  their 
children grow  up according  to  parental  norms  and  not  by those 
of  their  playmates  from  another  class.  The  need  to  shield  the 
children from  what are considered  harmful  influences  begins on 
the block, but it is  translated into the conflict over the school, the 
definitional  struggles  within  the  voluntary  associations  whose 
programs affect the socialization of children, and, ultimately, into 
political  conflicts.  Each group wants  to  put its cultural  stamp on 
the  organizations  and  institutions  that  are  the  community,  for 
otherwise  the family  and  its culture are  not safe.  In  a  society  in 
which extended families are unimportant and the nuclear family 
cannot  provide  the  full  panoply  of  personnel  and  activities  to 
hold children in the family culture, parents must use community 
institutions for this purpose, and every portion of the community 
therefore  becomes  a  battleground  for  the  defense  of  familial 
values. 

This thesis  must  not  be  exaggerated,  for  much  of  the  conflict 
is,  as  it  has  always  been,  between  the  haves  and  the  have-nots. 
Even if Levittown's median  income is  considerably above the na-
tional  average  even  for  white  families,  no  one  feels  affiuent 
enough  to  let  other  people  determine  how  their  own  income 
should be spent.  Most  of  the  political  conflict  in  the community 
rages over how  much of the family  income should be given over 
to the community, and then,  how it should be used.  In fact,  con-
sensus  about  municipal  policies  and  expenditures  exists  only 
about the house.  Because many Levittowners are first-time  home-
owners,  they are especially eager to protect that home against loss 
of value, both as  property and as  status image.  But every class has 
its  own  status  image and its  own  status fears.  Working class  peo-
ple  do  not  want  to  be  joined  by  lower  class  neighbors  or  to  be 

Levittown  and  America 

•  415  • 

forced  to adopt middle class styles.  Lower middle class people do 
not want more working class  neighbors or to  be forced  to  adopt 
cosmopolitan  styles,  and upper middle class  people want neither 
group  to  dominate  them.  These  fears  are  not,  as  commonly 
thought,  attributes  of  status-seeking,  for  few  Levittowners  are 
seeking higher status;  they are  fears  about self-image.  When  peo-
ple reject pluralism, they do so  because accepting the viability of 
other ways  of living suggests  that  their  own  is  not as  absolute  as 
they  need  to  believe.  The  outcome  is  the  constant  search  for 
compatible  people  and  the  rejection  of  those  who  are  different. 
\Vhen  the  three class  groups-not  to  mention  their subgroup-
ings  and  yet  other  groups  with  different  values--must  live  to-
gether  and  share  a  common  government,  every  group  tries  to 
make sure  that  the  institutions and  facilities  which  serve  the en-
tire community maintain  its own  status and culture, and no one 
is  happy when  another  group  wins.  If working class  groups  can 
persuade  the  Township  Committee  to  allocate  funds  for  a  fire-
house,  middle  class  groups  unite  'in  a  temporary  coalition  to 
guarantee that a  library is  also  established.  When the upper mid-
dle class  group attempts to  influence school  policy  to shape edu-
cation  to  its  standard,  lower  middle  class  residents  raise  the 
specter of Levittown aping Brookline and Scarsdale, while work-
ing class  people  become  fearful  that  the  schools  will  neglect dis-
cipline or  that  taxes  will  rise  further.  Consequently,  each  group 
seeks  power  to  prevent  others  from  shaping the  institutions  that 
must be shared.  They do not seek  power as  an  end in itself,  but 
only  to  guarantee  that  their  priorities  will  be  met  by  the  com-
munity.  Similarly,  they  do  not  demand  lower  taxes  simply  for 
economic  reasons  (except  for  those  few  really  hard  pressed)  but 
in order to be sure that community institutions are responsive to 
their  familial  values  and  status  needs.  Obviously,  power  sought 
for these ends is  hard to share, and decisions for levying and allo-
cating public funds are difficult to compromise. 

The  third shortcoming of  the community,  then,  is  the  failure 
to  establish  a  meaningful  relationship  between  home  and  com-
munity and  to reconcile  class-cultural  diversity with government 
and  the  provision  of  public  services.  Levittowners,  like  other 
Americans,  not only see  government as  a  parasite and  public ser-
vices  as a  useless  expenditure of funds  better spent privately, but 
they  do  not  allow  government  to adapt  these  services  to  the  di-
versity among the residents.  Government is  committed to  the es-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

tablishment  of  a  single  (and  limited)  set  of  public  services,  and 
its  freedom  to  do  otherwise  is  restricted  by  legislation  and,  of 
course,  by  American  tradition.  Government  has  always  been  a 
minor  supplier  of  services  basic  to  everyday  life,  and  an  enemy 
whose  encroachment  on  private  life  must  be  resisted.  The  pri· 
mary source of this conception is  the historic American prejudice 
against  public services,  which  stems  in  part from  the  rural  tradi-
tion  of the  individual  and his  family  as  a  self-sufficient  unit,  but 
which is  perpetuated by contemporary cultural  values,  and made 
possible  by  the  affluence  which  embles  at  least  middle  class 
families  to  live  with  only minimal  dependence  on  local  govern-
ment.  The  bias  against  public  services  does  not  interfere  with 
their  use,  however,  but only  with  their  fmancin~, and  their  ex-
tension and proliferation.  Nor does it lead Levittowners to reject 
government  outright,  but  only  to  channel  it  into  a  few  limited 
functions.  Among these,  the primary one is  the protection of  the 
home against diversity. 

Government  thus  becomes a  defense  agency,  to  be  taken  over 
by  one  group  to  defend  itself  against  others  in  and  out  of  the 
community. The idea  that it could  have  positive functions,  such 
as  the provision of facilities to make life richer and more comfort-
able,  is  resisted,  for  every  new  governmental  function  is  seen 
first  as  an  attempt  by  one  community  group  to  increase  its 
dominance over others.  Of course,  these attempts are rarely man-
ifest, for  the political dialogue deals mainly with substantive mat-
ters,  but when  Levittowners  spoke  against  a  proposal,  they  were 
reacting  principally  against  those  who  proposed  it  rather  than 
against its substance. 

Until government can  tailor  its actions  to  the community's di-
versity,  and  until  people  can  accept  the  inevitability  of conflict 
and  pluralism  in  order  to  give  government  that  responsibility, 
they  will  prefer  to  spend  their  money  for  privately  and  com-
mercially  supplied  services.  Unlike  city  hall,  the  marketplace  is 
sensitive to diversities among the customers and does not require 
them  to  engage  in  political  conflict  to  get  what  they  want.  0£ 
course,  not all  people can  choose  the  marketplace over  city  hall, 
but  Levittowner-s  are  affluent  enough  to  do  so.  Moreover,  until 
parents have steered their children safely into their own class and 
culture--or have given up trying-they are likely to seek out rela-
tively  homogeneous  communities  and  small  ones,  so  that  they 
have  some  control  over  government's  inroads  against  personal 

Levittown  and  America 

and  familial  autonomy.  This not  only maintains  the sovereignty 
of  hundreds  of small  local  governments  but  also  contributes  to 
the desire to own a house and a free-standing one. 

LEVITTOWN AS  AMERICA 

The  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  Levittown  are  those  of  many 
American  communities,  and  the  Levittowners  closely  resemble 
other young  middle  class  Americans.  They are  not  America,  for 
they  are  not  a  numerical  majority  in  the  population,  but  they 
represent  the  major constituency  of  the  largest and  most  power-
ful  economic and  political  institutions  in American  society-the 
favored  customers and voters whom  these  seek  to attract and sat-
isfy.  Upper  middle  class  Americans  may  spend  more  per  capita 
and  join  more  groups,  but  they  are  fewer  in  number  than  the 
lower  middle  classes.  ·working and  lower  class  people  are  more 
numerous but  they have  less  money and  power;  and people  over 
forty,  who  still  outnumber young adults,  are  already committed 
to most of the goods, affiliations, and ideas they will need in their 
lifetime. 

Even  so,  Levittowners are  not really  members of  the  national 
society,  or for  that  matter; of a  mass  society.  They are  not  apa-
thetic conformists ripe for  takeover  by a  totalitarian  elite or cor-
porate  merchandiser·;  they  are  not  conspicuous  consumers  and 
slaves to sudden whims of cultural and political  fashion;  they are 
not even  organization  men or  particularly other-directed  person-
alities.  Clearly  inner-directed  strivers  are  a  minority  in  Levit-
town,  and  tradition-directed  people  would  not  think  of moving 
to  a  new  community  of  strangers,  but  most  people  maintain  a 
balance  between  inner  personal  goals  and  the  social  adjustment 
necessary  to  live  with  neighbors  and  friends  that,  I  suspect,  is 
prevalent all  over lower middle class America. Indeed, the inabil-
ity to empathize with diversity would suggest that inner-direction 
may  still  be  a  much  stronger  pattern  among  the  Levittowners 
than  it  was  among  the  upper  middle  class  people  studied  by 
Riesman  and  his  associates.2  Although  ethnic,  religious,  and 
regional  differences  are  eroding,  the  never  ending conflicts  over 
other  differences  are  good  evidence  that  Levittowners  are  far 
from becoming mass men. 

Although  they  are citizens of a  national  polity and  their  lives 
are  shaped  by  national  economic,  social,  and  political  forces, 

•  418  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

Levittowners  deceive  themselves  into  thinking that  the  commu-
nity,  or  rather  the  home,  is  the  single  most  influential  unit  in 
their  lives.  Of  course,  in  one  way  they  are  right;  it  is  the  place 
where  they  can  be  most  influential,  for  if  they  cannot  persuade 
the  decision-makers,  they  can  influence  family  members.  Home 
is  also  the  site  of  maximal  freedom,  for  within  its  walls  people 
can  do  what  they  want  more  easily  than  anywhere  else.  But 
because  they are  free  and  influential  only  at  home,  their depen-
dence on  the  national  society  ought to be  obvious to  them.  This 
not  being  the  case,  the  real  problem  is  that  Levittowners  have 
not  yet  become  aware  of  how  much  they  are  a  part  of  the  na-
tional society and economy. 

In  viewing  their  homes  as  the center of life,  Levittowners are 
still  using  a  societal  model  that  fit  the  rural  America  of  self-
sufficient  farmers  and  the  feudal  Europe  of  self-isolating  ex-
tended  families.  Yet  the  critics  who  argue  about  the  individual 
versus  mass  society  are  also  anachronistic;  they are  still  thinking 
of  the  individual  artist  or  intellectual  who  must  shield  himself 
from  a  society which either rejects  him or coopts  him  to produce 
popular culture.  lloth  Levittowners and critics  have  to  learn that 
they  live  in  a  national  society  characterized  by  pluralism  and 
bureaucracy, and that the basic conflict is  not between individual 
(or  family)  and  society,  but  between  the  classes  (and  other  in-
terest groups)  who live  together in a  burealfcratized political and 
cultural  democracy.  The  prime  challenge  is  how  to  live  with 
bureaucracy;  how  to  use  it rather  than  be used  by it;  how  to  ob-
tain  individual  freedom  and  social  resources  from  it  through 
political action. 

Yet  even  though  Levittowners  and  other  lower  middle  class 
Americans .continue  to  be  home-centered,  they  are  much  more 
"in the world"  than  their parents and grandparents were.  Those 
coming  out  of  ethnic  working  class  backgrounds  have  rejected 
the  "amoral  familism" 8  which  pits  every  family  against  every 
other  in  the  struggle  to  survive  and  the  ethnocentrism  which 
made  other  cultures  and  even  other  neighborhoods  bitter  ene-
mies.  This generation trusts its neighbors, participates with them 
in social and civic activities,  and no longer sees governmeot as  in-
evitably corrupt.  Even  working class  Levittowners have  begun  to 
give  up  the  suspicion  that  isolated  their  ancestors  from  all  but 
family  ;md  childhood  friends.  Similarly,  the descendants of rural 

Levittown  and  America 

•  41 9  • 

Protestant  America  have  given  up  the  xenophobia  that  turned 
previous generations against the Catholic and Jewish immigrants, 
they  have  almost  forgotten  the  intolerant  Puritanism  whicli 
triggered  attacks  against  pleasure  and  enjoyment,  and  they  no 
longer fully accept the doctrine of laissez fa ire that justifies the de-
fense  of all  individual rights and privileges against others' needs. 
These and other changes have come about not because  people 
are now  better or more tolerant human beings,  but because  they 
are affluent.  For  the  Levittowners,  life  is  not a  fight  for  survival 
any  more;  they  have  been  able  to  move  into  a  community  in 
which income and status are equitably enough distributed so that 
neighbors are no longer treated as  enemies,  even  if  they are still 
criticized  for  social  and  cultural  deviance.  By  any  yardstick  one 
chooses,  Levittowners  treat  their  fellow  residents  more  ethically 
and  more  democratically  than  did  their  parents  and  grandpar-
ents.•  They also  live a  "fuller"  and  "richer"  life.  Their culture 
may be less subtle and sophisticated than that of the intellectual, 
their family life less  healthy than that advocated by psychiatrists, 
and their politics  less  thoughtful and democratic than the politi-
cal  philosophers'-yet all of these are  superior to what prevailed 
among the working and lower middle classes of past generations. 
But  beyond  these  changes,  it  is  striking  how  little  American 
culture among the Levittowners differs from what De Toqueville 
reported in his travels through small-town middle class America a 
century ago.  Of course,  he was  here  before  the  economy needed 
an  industrial  proletariat,  but  the  equality  of  men  and  women, 
the  power  of  the  child  over  his  parents,  the  importance  of  the 
voluntary association,  the social  functions  of the church,  and the 
rejection of high culture seem to be holdovers from his time, and 
so  is  the adherence to the traditional virtues:  individual honesty, 
thrift,  religiously  inspired  morality,  Franklinesque  individual-
ism,  and  Victorian  prudery.  Some  Levittowners  have  retained 
the  values  of  rural  ancestors;  some  have  only  begun  to  practice 
them as  affluence enabled them to give up the values of a  survival-
centered culture. Still other eternal verities remain;  class conflict 
is as  alive as  ever,  even if the struggle  is  milder and  the have-nots 
in Levittown have much more than the truly poor. Working class 
culture  continues  to  flourish,  even  though  its  rough  edges  are 
wearing smooth  and  its  extended  family  and  public  institutions 
are  not  brought  to  the  suburbs.  Affluence  and  better  education 

•  420  • 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

have  made  a  difference,  but  they  have  not  made  the  factory 
worker  middle class,  any more  than college  attendance has  made 
lower middle class people cosmopolitan. 

What seems  to have  happened  is  that improvements and inno-
vations  are added  to  old culture  patterns,  giving affluent Ameri-
cans  a  foot  in  several  worlds.  They have  more  knowledge  and  a 
broader  outlook  than  their  ancestors,  and  they  enjoy  the  advan-
tages  of  technology,  but  these  are  superimposed  on  old  ways. 
While  conservative  critics  •ail  about  technology's  dehumaniza-
tion of modern man, the Levittowners who spend their days  pro-
gramming  computers  come  home  at  night  to  practice  the  very 
homely  and  old-fashioned  virtues  these  critics  defend. 5  For  ex-
ample,  they  have  television  sets,  but  they  watch  much  the  same 
popular  comedies  and  melodramas  their  ancestors  saw  on  the 
nineteenth  century  stage.  The  melodramas  are  less  crude  and 
vaudeville  is  more  respectable;  the  girls  dance  with  covered 
bosoms,  but  Ed  Sullivan's  program  is  pure  vaudeville  and  "the 
Jackie  Gleason  Show"  even  retains  traces  of  the  working  class 
music hall.  The overlay of old and new is  not all good, of course; 
the  new  technology  has  created  methods  of war  and  destruction 
which  the  old  insularity  allows  Americans  to  unleash  without 
much  shame or guilt,  and some  Levittowners  may  find  work less 
satisfying  than  their ancestors.  But only  some,  for  the  majority's 
parents slaved  in  exhausting jobs which  made  them  too  tired  to 
enjoy the advantages of suburbia even if they could have afforded 
them. On  the  whole,  however,  the  Levittowners have  only  bene-
fitted  from  the  changes  in  society  and  economy  that  have  oc-
curred  in  this  century,  and  if  they  were  not  given  to  outdated 
models  of  social  reality,  they  might  feel  freer  about  extending 
these  benefits  to  less  fortunate  sectors  of  American  society.  But 
whether  people's  models  are  anachronistic  or  avant-garde,  they 
are rarely willing to surrender their own powers and privileges to 
others. 

LEVITI'OWN  AND  THE  FUTURE  OF  SUBURBIA 

Presently  available  data  make  it  certain  that  another  suburban 
housing  boom  will  take  place  during  the  next  ten  years.  As  the 
children  born  during  the  period  of  high  family  formation  and 
fertility after World War II become parents, they will need hous-
ing  to  raise  their  own  children,  and  will  almost  surely  want  to 

Levittown  and  America 

•  421 

• 

find  it  in  the  suburbs. 6  Unless  a  sharp  economic  downturn  re· 
duces  middle  class  employment  opportunities  and  either  slows 
down  the  rate  of  family  formation  or  forces  young  families  to 
double  up with their parents,  yet  another ring of suburbart com-
munities will spring up around most American cities. 

The form  the newest suburbia will  take  is  as  yet  unknown.  In 
most  metropolitan  areas,  the  current  building  of  subdivisions, 
one  by  one,  will  probably  continue.  Where  land  for  suburban 
development  is  running short,  the  single-family  house  may  give 
way  to  the  row  house;  where  land  is· plentiful  (as  in  the  West) 
more  comprehensively  planned  new  towns  with  their  own 
sources of employment are possible. 1  In big cities like New York 
and Chicago, where the remaining vacant land is  more than forty 
miles  from  downtown,  future  suburban growth  may  be  reduced 
by  the  unwillingness  of commuters  to  travel  over  an  hour  each 
way,  although  this  may  in  turn  generate  more  support for  high-
speed mass  transit.  But the present trend of industrial decentrali-
zation is  likely to increase as  well,  so  that more job opportunities 
will  be  available  in  the  suburbs  themselves,  bringing  yet  more 
vacant land into the range of an acceptable journey to work. And 
if  the  decentralization  of industry  is  accompanied  by  the  decen-
tralization of offices,  nothing should impede further suburbaniza-
tion  in  all  American  cities. 

This  likelihood  is  already  being  viewed  with  alarm  in  some 
quarters.  Advocates  of the city are  fearful  that further  suburban 
development  can  only  result  in  added  physical,  financial,  cul-
tural, and political deterioration of the cities. They are joined by 
opponents of urban sprawl and by conservationists who are afraid 
that  new suburbanization will  further reduce rural  acreages  and 
may even cut into  the  forests  and wildernesses  that now  provide 
recreational  opportunities and land reserves at the edges of many 
metropolitan areas.  In this coalition can also  be found  the critics 
of suburbia,  concerned  that an  undesirable way  of life  will  pro-
liferate even  further in  the  next generation. 

Some of these fears  may be reasonable, but none justify halting 
suburbanization.  The  inaccuracy of the suburban  critique  indi-
cates that if  the suburbs have  positive consequences for  the  pres-
ent generation  of young  parents,  they will  have  similar  ones for 
the  next  generation.  Although  suburbanization  may  further  in-
crease  residential  segregation  by class  and race,  class  segregation 
may be reduced as class  lines within the middle class and between 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

the  lower  middle  and  working  class  are  blurred.  And  if  future 
suburbanization  takes  the  form  of new  towns  and  large subdivi-
sions,  these  will  be  (like  Levittown)  more  heterogeneous  than 
small subdivisions  and  urban  neighborhoods-which  have  often 
been  one-class  and  one-race  areas. 

The fear  of more urban sprawl also seems exaggerated.  Urban 
sprawl  is  an  inefficient  use  of  land rather  than  the  absolute evil 
it  has  been  labeled,  but  it  also  promotes  flexibility  of  growth. 8 
If employment opportunities continue  to decentralize,  the waste-
ful  features  of  urban  sprawl  may  be  reduced,  partly  because 
vacant  areas  will  be  filled  in,  but mostly  because  new  suburban 
centers with  industry and  offices  as  well  as  shopping centers  will 
develop  all  over  the  metropolitan  area.9  Indeed,  in  the  future, 
the  present  mononuclear  metropolis,  with  a  downtown  center 
surrounded by a disordered mass  of urban and suburban areas of 
low  density,  is  likely  to  become  a  multinuclear  one  with  many 
centers,  of  which  downtown  is  only  the  oldest and  most  impor-
tant. 

Probably the major disadvantage of urban sprawl  is  the prolif-
eration  of  small  local  government. 10  Although  it  provides  peo-
ple with considerable control over their own destinies,  it discour-
ages  public  action  on  the  many  metropolitan-wide  problems.  A 
logical  case  can  be  made  for  some  form  of  metropolitan  govern-
ment, and the case has been made logically since the beginning of 
the twentieth century.  Unfortunately, its advocates often see only 
the  advantages  for  the  larger  area,  but  ignore  the  very  real  dis-
advantages for local  communities. These have  opposed metropol-
itan government in  the past  as  a  trespass on local  autonomy,  and 
for  fear  of domination  by  predominantly white Catholic or non-
white working class  urban voters.  (On the other hand, as  suburb-
anization continues, city residents may begin to oppose it for fear 
of  domination  by  white  middle  class  suburbanites.)  If the  ele-
ments of metropolitan  government  can  be' separated  into  those 
badly needed  and  universally  wanted,  those  which  only  increase 
governmental  efficiency  and  economy  at  the  cost  of  local  auto-
nomy, and those which are made unworkable by intense class and 
race conflicts, it may be possible to promote the first.  Federal sub-
sidies,  now  already  beginning  to  flow,  may  make  it  worthwhile 
for  suburbs  to  band  together  with  other  suburbs  and  with  the 
city  on  selected  problems  and  public  services.  But  further  sub-
urbanization  would  not  affect  the  chances  of  metropolitan  gov-

Levittown  and  America 

ernment.  The  suburbs  of  the  next  decade  and  generation  may 
strengthen  existing  small  communities,  but  they  will  not  add 
many new ones  to the welter of local  government. They will  not 
cut down governmental  sprawl,  but neither will  they  increase  it. 
The reduction  in  open  space  is  even  less  serious.  Despite  the 
uproar  over  "megalopolis,"  there  is  an  immense  amount  of  va-
cant  land  even· within  that  alleged  belt  of  city  running  from 
Boston  to  Norfolk.  Most  of America  is  less  densely  settled  than 
the Eastern seaboard, and as  Hans Blumenfeld once pointed out, 
the country is  so  rich  in land that all  Americans could be housed 
at  suburban  densities  in  the  buildable  parts  of  California.  The 
disappearance  of  farmland  near  the  big cities  is  irrelevant  now 
that  food  is  produced  on  huge  industrialized  farms,  and  the  de-
struction of raw land and private upper class golf courses seems a 
small  price  to  pay for  extending the benefits  of  suburban  life  to 
more people. 

More  recreational  acreage  will  be  needed  with  increasing 
leisure  time,  but principally as  small  parks  in  the dense  portions 
of the city and as larger ones for weekend and vacation trips. The 
latter can  be located at  the edge of the  metropolitan  area,  where 
they  can  be  made  accessible  by  expressways  and  mass  transit. 
Moreover,  parks  are  much  less  important  than  beaches,  lakes, 
amusement areas, camping sites, and motels with adjacent recrea-
tion  facilities.  Wildernesses  provide  a  desirable  recreation  re-
source,  but they are used by  relatively  few  people per acre.  Mak-
ing  inexpensive  and  efficient  transportation  available  to  distant 
wildernesses  would  be  more  sensible  than  preventing  many 
people from  living in  the suburbs in order to  retain a  wilderness 
nearby  in  which  a  handful  can  seek  solitude  a  few  times  a  year. 
Actually,  the conservationist  opposition  to  further  suburbani-
zation rests less  on the need for recreational land than on a desire 
to  reserve  vacant land  for  future  generations,  and  this  in  turn  is 
based  less  on  accurate  predictions of actual  land needs  than  on a 
value  judgment  that  the  preservation  of  open  land  is  more  im-
portant  than  the current needs  of people.  Although  land should 
be saved for requirements of ecological  balance and for  the use  of 
future generations if current needs are not urgent,  I  believe  that 
restricting  current  development  for  an  unpredictable  future  is 
undesirable.  We do not know  today how Americans will  want to 
live  fifty  years  from  now,  or  where.  By  then  work and  play  pat-
terns  may  have  changed  so  much  that many  people will  want  to 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

live a  hundred miles or more  beyond the city limits. Transporta-
tion methods may be available to bring a  wilderness five  hundred 
miles  away  within  easy  and  cheap  reach  of  every  metropolitan 
area  resident,  and  economic  and  technological  devices  for  rapid 
land-use changes may  have  been created.  Consequently,  ignoring 
the  present demand  for  land  in order to  save  it for an  unknown 
future  demand  by  our  grandchildren  cannot  easily  be  justified. 
For  this  reason,  I  suspect  that  conservationist  opponents  of 
suburbanization  are  less  concerned with  future  land needs  than 
with a  desire  to preserve land from  people.  Many-although not 
all-of  the  advocates  of  wilderness  preservation  are  ideological 
descendants of the nineteenth century conservatives who opposed 
European immigration because they did not want America to be-
come a  country of non-Puritan city dwellers.  In preserving open 
land,  they  also  wanted  to  preserve  America  as  a  predominantly 
rural,  predominantly Protestant society in which  they held  polit-
ical  and  cultural  power.  The  idea  that  America  ought  to  be  a 
country of open spaces  rather than one of people deriving maxi-
mum  utility and  pleasure  from  the  land  still  exists  today  and  is 
manifested  by opposition  to  proposals  that virgin  lands  (note  the 
phrase)  be  opened  up  for  intensive  recreational  use.  Opponents 
fear  that  the  land  will  be  "spoiled"  by  unappreciative  (read 
urban  middle  and  working  class)  populations.  They  choose  to 
bar  people  instead  of  demanding sufficient  funds  to  remove  the 
garbage  left  behind  by  people  who  have  engaged  in  the  very 
"constructive  and  wholesome"  recreational  pursuits  that  wilder-
ness advocates also favor. 

The  final  source  of  opposition  to  further  suburbanization 
comes  from  the  defenders  of  the city.  As  the  white  middle  class 
continues  to  leave  the  cities,  these  become  more  and  more  the 
residence of a small number of rich people-at least in the biggest 
metropoli-and of a  large number of poor people, many of them 
nonwhite.  This  trend  is  alleged  to  destroy  cities  as  centers  of 
civilization,  on  the  assumption  that culture  can  be  created  only 
in the city.  Cities were centers of culture in the  past, not because 
they were cities,  but because  they  housed  the upper-income  pop-
ulations  who  supported  the  creators  of  culture.  The  current 
flourishing  of culture  in  many  American  cities  denies  the  tradi-
tional  assumption,  for  while  its  supporters  have  been  living  in 
the  suburbs  for  more  than  two  generations,  they  have  not  only 
returned  to  the  city  to  use  its  cultural  facilities,  but  have  also 

Levittown  and  America 

•  425  • 

generated  suburban  facilities,  a  trend  that  will  increase  more 
rapidly  in  the  next  decades.  Whether  or  not  the  dominance  of 
poor  people  in  the  cities  will  affect  the  creators  of  culture  is 
harder to judge, but many who supply the middle class with cul-
ture  are  already  living  in  suburbs  and  exurbs  without  loss  of 
creativity,  while  new  urban  (but  not  middle  class)  culture  is 
coming  into  being  for  the  ever  larger  pool  of  poor  people. 

As  more  middle  class  taxpayers  move  beyond  the  city  limits, 
they  will  reduce  the  tax  income  of  the  city  even  as  a  further 
influx of poor people increases  the need for  costly  municipal  ser-
vices.  The next round of suburbanization should not worsen  the 
situation,  however,  for  many of the young people who wiJI  want 
suburban houses  in  the coming years  are already  in  the suburbs. 
Even  so,  it  is  obvious  that  urban  governments  are  in  poor  eco-
nomic  health  and  that  something  has  to  be  done.  The  solution 
is  not,  however, to attempt to  reverse  a  residential  process  that is 
not really  reversible,  but  to  find  new  sources  of  income  for  the 
cities.  Recent  federal  legislation  has  established  the  principle 
that  cities  must  be  subsidized  by  federal  funds,  and  some 
cities are already levying payroll taxes that require suburban com-
muters to  pay for  their use of city  services  and income taxes that 
counteract the decline of receipts from the property tax. The best 
solution, however, is  probably a single federal  income tax,  a  por-
tion of which would be distributed to  the taxpayer's community. 
This  would  not  only  eliminate  the  need  to  raise  property  tax 
rates as  property  values  decline,  but  would  also  result in  higher 
tax  levies,  for  there  is  less  public  opposition  to  federal  income 
taxes,  and  tax  receipts go  up with  increasing  incomes. 

The  political  feasibility  of  this  solution  is  not  enhanced  by 
further  suburbanization,  however,  for  as  more  and  more  white 
middle  class  people  move  to  the  suburbs  they will  be extremely 
reluctant  to  support legislation  to subsidize  the urban nonwhite 
poor.  This possibility  is  frightening,  but  it cannot  be dealt with 
by  attempting  to  prevent  further  suburbanization.  If the  next 
generation  of  young  families  wants  to  live  in  the  suburbs  and 
can afford  to do  so,  it  will  vote down any  programs  that  restrict 
its  freedom  of residential movement.  Some young people may be 
persuaded  to  remain  in  or return  to  the  city  by  urban  renewal 
programs,  but their numbers are not likely  to  be large,  for  even 
with  increasing college attendance,  the proportion  of  city-loving 
cosmopolitans remains  minute. The only  solution  I  can see  is  to 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

permit further  suburbanization,  but in  ways  which  prevent  fur-
ther economic deterioration of the city.  Payroll  and income taxes 
are  one  answer,  but  federal  subsidies  to  the  city,  sweetened  by 
grants  for  services  wanted  by  suburbs  and  commuters,  may  be 
able  to  obtain  the "suburban vote." 

All  of these  problems are immensely complicated by the racial 
difference between city and suburban residents,  by the persistent 
increase  in  the  proportion of nonwhite residents  in  the  city  and 
the  equally  persistent  ability  of  the  suburbs  to  maintain  racial 
exclusion  practices.  If suburbanization continues  on  the  present 
basis,  an increasingly nonwhite city surrounded by rings of white 
suburbs may  make  efforts  to  solve  the problems of  the city even 
more difficult  than  they are  today.  Even so,  one  little-recognized 
obstacle  to  the  solution  of  these  problems  is  the  very  image  of 
the predominantly nonwhite city-as a  bankrupt, disintegrating, 
violent  and  corrupt  municipality.  This  image  is  a  fantasy,  a  re-
flection of white middle class fears, felt most strongly by white sub-
urbanites  who  will  have  to  commute  to  the  stores,  offices,  and 
cultural  facilities  of  the  city.  In  reality,  such  a  city  will  not  be 
chaotic, and for nonwhite residents, it may well be more desirable 
than today's  nominally integrated city. 

Although there are many Negroes, middle class or with middle 
class  aspirations,  who want to live in an integrated suburb, there 
are  many  more,  not  yet  middle  class,  who  would  favor  further 
white  suburbanization  because  they  would  be  able  to  leave  the 
slums  for  better  urban  neighborhoods  deserted  by  the  whites. 
Moreover,  if  they  became  a  political  majority  in  the  city,  they 
might  be  able  to  elect  officials  more  sensitive  to  their  needs  for 
public  services  and  their  priorities  for  the  allocation  of  public 
funds  than  the  present  white  incumbents  are.  A  predominantly 
nonwhite  city  would  be  even  poorer  than  today's  city,  but  Ne-
groes  are  voters,  and  if  they  can  only  give  up  their  habitual 
allegiance  to  the  urban  Democratic  machines  and  threaten  to 
bolt  the  national  Democratic  party,  whichever  party  is  in  power 
in  Washington  will  be motivated  to  increase  federal  subsidies  to 
the city.  If they  can  also  persuade  Washington  to  develop  effec-
tive  antipoverty programs that will  create  better  jobs and higher 
incomes,  they  will  be able  to  achieve a  higher  standard of  living 
and will  be less angry and hostile  toward middle class whites than 
they  are  today.  Since  white  anxieties  about  the  predominantly 
nonwhite  city  are  ultimately  based  on  class  rather  than  race, 

Levittown  and  America 

these  anxieties  would  be  reduced  considerably.  Indeed,  those 
suburbanites  who  prefer  the  city  but shun  it  now  because  they 
do not want poor neighbors may return to  take advantage  of its 
urbanity. 

Opponents of further  white  exodus also  argue-as they  have 
for generations-that it means a loss  of "civic leaders"  to the city 
and less  concern  for the city  on the  part of upper  income people 
with downtown property holdings. From the point of view of the 
remaining white middle class residents,  this  loss is  real,  since the 
civic  leaders represent  some  of  their  interests  in  the  city  power 
structure. The low-income population may see it otherwise,  how-
ever,  for  control  of  public  welfare  and  private charity  by  these 
civic leaders  has  only helped to  keep  it a  proletarian  underclass. 
And  whether  the owners  and  managers  of downtown real  estate 
would act differently if they  lived in the city has yet  to be shown. 
Most  likely, their behavior  is  determined by profit  potential and 
property tax rates. 

The possibility that a  city governed by  the  leaders of  the non-
white poor population may  have advantages  for  that  population 
does  not,  however,  reduce  the  urgency  of  the  need  to  integrate 
the suburbs.  Not only will the number of nonwhites who want to 
live in the suburbs and  in integrated communities on either side 
of the city limits increase in the years to come, but the continuing 
exodus of job opportunities into the suburbs makes it essential for 
nonwhite workers  to  be able  to  live  near  these  sources  of work. 
Consequently,  present  and  future  suburbs  have  to  be  opened 
to  nonwhite  residents.  Indeed,  the  goal  is  not  to  hold  back 
further  suburban  development,  but  to  make  sure  that  its 
benefits are extended to all  parts of the population, regardless of 
color and class. 

The  implementation  of  racial  integration  in  the  suburbs  is 
almost  as  difficult  as  the  restriction  of  future  suburban  growth. 
Although Levittown accepted the peaceful integration of a  hand-
ful  of  Negro  middle  class  families  once  state  law  had  made  it 
mandatory, I doubt whether it or any other suburb would volun-
tarily open its doors to larger numbers of nonwhite people, espe-
cially those of lower income and status.  The only solution  is  fed-
eral  action.  When  it becomes  politically  feasible  for  the  federal 
government  to  require  "open  housing,"  either  through  legisla-
tion  or  executive  order,  not  only  will  the  legal  imperative  per-
suade many suburbanites to accept the inevitable, but if all com-

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

munities  must  integrate,  no  one  can  expect  to  live  in  all-white 
communities. 

But  legal  integration  is  not sufficient,  for  only a  small  propor-
tion  of the total  nonwhite  urban  population can afford to  live  in 
the  suburbs.  Consequently,  the  federal  government  must  also 
mount  a  massive  housing  program,  combining  rent  subsidies, 
builder subsidies, and perhaps even direct federal  construction to 
enable nonwhite city dwellers to move to the suburbs. 11  A  similar 
program should enable others to move  to better urban neighbor-
hoods  and  yet  others  to  new  and  rehabilitated  housing  in  the 
ghetto.  Many  liberals  have  debated  long and  earnestly  whether 
new,  or rebuilt, housing should be provided in the ghetto as  long 
as  white  opposition  makes  integrated  housing  impossible,  or 
whether new housing should be built only outside the ghetto and 
even  outside  the city  to  prevent  the  perpetuation of segregation, 
even  if this means less new housing for Negroes  in the short run. 
But  this  dichotomy  is  false  and  dangerous.  Residential  integra-
tion  is a  highly  worthwhile goal,  but  it  is  not the only goal,  par-
ticularly  since  so  far  it  has  helped  mainly  middle  class  Negroes 
and has  often decreased available inexpensive housing for poorer 
Negroes,  for  example,  when  urban  renewal  displaces  them  to 
make  room  for  integrated  middle  and  high  income  projects. 
Moreover,  not  all  Negroes  want  to  move  to  the  suburbs  today, 
some  want  to  stay  in  the  city,  and  some  even  in  the  ghetto,  al-
though  unfortunately  no  one  knows  what  proportion  of  the 
ghetto  population  wants  (or  can  afford)  each  of  the  three  alter-
natives. There is no reason why better housing cannot be built in 
the ghetto and the suburbs integrated concurrently. 

The  process  of  integration  (suburban  and  urban)  would  have 
to be planned and paced  to avert white panic over racial  invasion 
and  status decline.  Levittown's successful  integration  is  evidence 
that such  planning is  possible. Since the first  nonwhite suburban-
ites  will  undoubtedly  be  middle  class  or  aspiring  middle  class 
people, and since  the  kind of lower class  Negro whom suburban-
ites  fear  would  probably  be neither willing nor able  to  move  to 
the  suburbs  for  another  generation,  the  real  difficulties  of  inte-
gration are much  smaller  than  the  imagined ones.  It seems  hard 
to  believe  that the lower class  Negro family without job security 
or the unmarried mother would have much incentive to move to 
the  suburbs  even  with  federal  housing  subsidies;  both  want  to 
leave the slums,  but for better housing in the city. 12 

Levittown  and  America 

•  429  • 

The  costs  of  federal  programs  to  improve  living  conditions 
and  public  services  in  cities  (and  suburbs)  will  be  high,  and 
they  have  to  be  paid  with  public  funds.  Some  of  these  funds 
ought  to  come  from  suburbanization  itself,  and  specifically 
from  the  huge  increases  in  land  values  that  accompany  resi-
dential  development.  In  the  past,  the  federal  government  has 
supported suburban growth  through  FHA and VA  mortgage  in-
surance,  tax  writedowns  to  builders,  and  the  construction  of ex-
pressways,  but  neither  it  nor  local  and  state  governments  have 
obtained their share of the increase  in land values or of the spec-
ulative  profits created as  rural  land became suburban.  High spec-
ulative  profits  are  oft<m  justified  by  the  amount  of  risk  in  resi-
dential  development,  but these  risks  have  been  reduced  to  near-
nothing in the past two decades. Since the new suburban boom is 
virtually  a  certainty,  and  since  it  can  only  take  place  in  a  rela-
tively small number of locations in most metropolitan areas,  risks 
will  be even  smaller in  the future,  especially  if rent subsidy  pro-
grams are added  to  the present  array  of mortgage  insurance  and 
other  forms  of  risk  reduction  for  developers  and  builders.  Con-
sequently,  governments  should  be  participating  in  the  "profits" 
that come from  land turnover and suburban  building.  Indeed,  it 
would be desirable  to work out a  formula  by which taxes on land 
use change  increase as  risk  is  decreased;  and  these  taxes  ought to 
help pay for governmental subsidies. 

The  Suburban  Community of the  Future 

Although  a  number  of  changes  should  be  made  in  the  next 
round  of  suburbanization,  I  can  see  no  reason  to  oppose  its  oc-
currence  or  to  discourage  the  building  of  more  Levittowns. 
Whether  or not  the  Levitt  organization  will  or  should  build 
more  Levittowns  is  not  the  issue;  I  would  argue,  rather,  that 
more  communities  like  Levittown  are  desirable  if  people  want 
them.  Not only are  they more  efficient  than a  myriad  of smaller 
subdivisions,  but  they  permit  the  builder  to  install  community 
facilities  because of the economics resulting from  the scale of his 
operation. 

Of course, future new communities should learn from  and im-
prove  upon  Levittown.  For  instance,  prior  planning  should 
occur,  particularly to anticipate tax problems, and more physical 
facilities  should  be  installed  before  the  community  is  occupied. 
Not  only  should  builders  be  expected  to  include  some  of  the 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

capital  and  operating costs  of  these  facilities  in  the  house  price, 
but  federal,  state,  and  local  housing  agencies  should  subsidize 
those  facilities  which cannot be provided by the builder without 
·a  drastic  increase  in  the  house  price.  Federal  or  state  planning 
powers  and  subsidies  should  also  encourage  the  coordination  of 
residential  construction  with  industrial  location,  to  encourage 
factories  and offices  that can share the tax burden.  Even so,  most 
new suburbs will  be without industry,  and federal  aid to schools 
and other municipal services will  probably be needed  to provide 
those  rejected  by  local  voters.  Here  too,  financing  local  services 
from a diverted federal  income tax would be helpful. 

The suburban  facilities  which  ought  to  be subsidized first  are 
those needed or demanded by minorities but not likely to be pro-
vided  either by  the builder  or  by voters  once  the  community  is 
occupied.  Among  these  are  higher-quality  schools,  meaningful 
activities  for  teenagers,  and  more  comprehensive  programs  of 
public health. Community medical  health insurance programs in 
lieu of or in addition  to  federal  Medicare schemes would  be de-
sirable  to  reduce  the  high  cost  of medical  care  for  families  with 
young  children. 13  Community  mental  health  clinics  and  agen-
cies  that will  provide personal and family counseling are needed, 
as  are  community credit  unions  which  can  provide  low-interest 
loans  to  people  under  financial  pressure,  and  local  newspapers 
and other media to increase both social  and political communica-
tion  within  the  community.  Needless  to  say,  better  transporta-
tion  (both  within  the  community  and  to  the  outside)  than  was 
available in  Levittown during the time of my study is a necessity. 
As  the boundaries of the metropolitan area expand, all suburban 
communities and  urban neighborhoods ought to  be accessible  to 
each  other  and  to  the  downtown  and  suburban  centers  of  em-
ployment,  entertainment,  and  shopping.  Finally,  local  and  re-
gional  planning agencies  which  can  provide  benefit-cost  analyses 
for  the  solution  of  intracommunity  and  intercommunity  prob-
lems ought to be established. 

If government  took  a  major  role  in  the  preplanning  of  com-
munity facilities,  the  power of a  single  builder over the commu-
nity would be reduced. The problem is  to maximize his freedom 
to  build a  large-scale  venture and  to  innovate,  while  supervising 
him sufficiently so  that he will  provide for community needs that 
purchasers cannot voice  until  they have  moved  in.  For example, 

Levittown  and  America 

•  431  • 

Levittowners had  no chance to determine the size  of  the  schools, 
and  while  most  were  satisfied  with  what  Levitt  provided,  they 
should have had some choice in the matter. Ideally,  Levitt should 
have  been  required  to  build  larger  schools  at  the  start  or  to  in-
clude a  higher  portion  of  municipal  services  in  the  house  price, 
with any needed increases in house price made up by  federal  sub-
sidies  for  facilities.  Or  Levittowners  could  have  decided  among 
themselves  after  they  moved  in  whether  they  wanted  smaller 
classrooms,  and  then  resorted  to  public  controls  on  the  builder 
and federal subsidies to provide them. 

But perhaps the best form of control over the builder is choice. 
If people  are  told  what  community  plans  and  what  level  of  ser-
vices  they  are  buying  when  they  purchase  a  house,  and  if  they 
have alternative choices  in different  communities,  then  their  de-
cision  to  buy  assumes  agreement  with  the  proposed  level  of  ser-
vices.  Planning  for  the  next  round  of  suburban  communities 
should  reflect  the  increasing  diversity  of  life  styles  and  should 
ensure that many different kinds of communities are built. Some 
might  be like  today's  Levittown,  others might be equipped with 
more social  and recreational  facilities  (like  Reston, Virginia, and 
Columbia,  Maryland),  and  some  might  have  only  the  barest 
minimum  of  facilities  for  buyers  who  want  to  use  the  superior 
facilities  of  the  city.  Similarly,  there  ought  to  be  new  towns 
which  provide jobs  for  people  who want  to  keep  their  commut-
ing to a  minimum.  Variations  in  density and  house  style  should 
also  be  encouraged.  Row  house  and  garden  apartment  commu-
nities ought  to  be  built for  people  who  prefer to do less  garden-
ing  and  home  maintenance,  and  quasi-rural  communities 
might  be  constructed  to  allow  people  to  do  some  farming  in  a 
basically  suburban  environment.  Small  communities  like  those 
suggested  by  Paul  Goodman  might  be  founded  for  people  who 
want to participate directly in government and want to run their 
own  school  systems  and  municipal  services.  Many of  these  alter-
natives  will  not  be  politically or economically  feasible,  but  they 
ought to  be tried out on a  small  scale,  perhaps in a section  of an 
otherwise  typical  suburb.  Government  funds  ought  to  be  made 
available for such experiments, so  that it is  possible  to determine 
which can be built on a larger scale. 

But the most important priority for  future suburban planning 
is  the population  mix,  for  ultimately it determines the quality of 

THE  LEVITTOWNERS 

suburban  living.  In  suburbia  sui  generis,  the  population  mix 
must be broadened to make the opportunity for  suburban living 
available  to  everyone  who  can  and  wants  to  come.  Individual 
suburbs  need  not  be  balanced  to  parallel  the  metropolitan  area 
population,  but  as  long  as  local  taxes  pay  for  most  municipal 
services,  communities  must  be  economically  diverse  enough  to 
preve.nt  the  creation  of  low-income  communities  which  cannot 
provide the array of public services  their residents need more ur-
gently  than  affluent  people.  Communities must  also  be  planned 
to provide  the  block homogeneity and community heterogeneity 
I described  in Chapter Eight, which allows for compatible neigh-
bors, yet makes room for  all  kinds of people in the community as 
a  whole-allowing diverse groups to live  together peacefully and 
still  have the social  contacts and institutions each needs for a  full 
life.  How such communities can  be achieved  is  the prime future 
challenge  for  professional  planners.  They  must  de-emphasize 
sterile  physical  planning  questions  and  deal  with  social  ques-
tions:  how to program diversity so as  to optimize both social com-
patibility and individual  freedom;  with economic ones;  how resi-
dents  and  government  can  pay  for  the  private  and  public  re-
quirements  of suburban  living;  and  with  political  ones:  how  to 
find ways of opening the suburbs to all comers. 

It  is  easy  to  propose  community  improvements  and  even 
utopian  communities  that  will  make  Levittown  seem  obsolete. 
Yet  I  should  like  to  emphasize  once  more  that  whatever  its  im-
perfections,  Levittown is  a  good  place  to live.  Consequently,  it is 
much less  important to plan for new or improved suburban com-
munities  than  to  make sure  that more people  are  able  to  live  in 
suburbs  like  those  now  being built. Specifically,  the most urgent 
priority  is  to  make  the  benefits  of suburban  living  available  to 
the  poor  and  nonwhite  families,  now  condemned  to  slum  ghet-
toes,  who want to give  their children  and themselves a  better life 
beyond the city limits. Building more Levittowns which are open 
to  these  families  would  be  preferable  to  schemes  for  building 
more diverse suburbs,  for  these may require higher house prices, 
which  would  restrict  suburban  living  to  the  white  middle  class 
for  yet  another  generation.  The  ideal  solution  is  more,  better, 
and  more  variegated  new  towns  and  suburbs,  but  the  first 
priority  in  the  years  to  come  is  more  such  communities for  the 
less affluent. 

Levittown  and  America 

NOTES 

1.  There is  some evidence  that  the desire  for  the single-family  house 
is  international,  and  even  exists  in  countries which  cannot  afford 
to satisfy it.  I  found  it among Swedes  who  must live  in apartment 
complexes  (albeit  well-planned  ones);  it  is  reported  in  England 
by Orlans,  pp.  I06-1o7 and in  Ghana by Tetteh,  p.  25. 

2.  Riesman  (1950). 
3·  The term is  borrowed from  Banfield (1958),  p.  10. 
4·  Compare,  for  example,  the  picture  of  late  nineteenth  century 
class  relationships  in  a  small  New  England  town.  Thernstrom, 
Chaps.  1 and  2. 

5·  See,  for example,  Ellul. 
6.  If one assumes  that parents become first-home  buyers at about age 
twenty-five,  the  new  suburban  building boom  can  be expected  to 
begin  in  earnest  about  1972,  twenty-five  years  after  the  start  of 
the  postwar increase  in  family formation  and  fertility. 

7·  For  example,  two  sizeable  new  towns,  Columbia,  Maryland,  and 
Reston,  Virginia,  are now  being built near Washington,  D.C.  For 
a  study  of  these  and of the many  proposed California new  towns, 
see  Eichler. 

· 

8.  Lessinger,  Greer  (1962),  Chap.  7· 
9·  See,  e.g.,  Gutkind. 
10.  See,  e.g.,  Banfield  and  Grodzins,  Wood  (1961),  and  Greer  (1963). 
11.  For a  more detailed analysis,  see  Gans  (1965). 
12.  Many suburbs have their own Negro slum ghettoes,  and suburban 
slum dwellers obviously need the same kinds of assistance as  urban 
ones.  Some  can  be  helped  to  move  to  the  better side  of  the  sub-
urban  tracks,  especially  if  local  employers  will  integrate  their 
labor  force,  and  some  may  prefer  to  live  in  the  cities. 

13.  James Rouse,  the developer of Columbia, Maryland, has proposed 
the  establishment  of  community  health  insurance  that  would 
automatically cover  every  purchaser and  his  family. 

D 

Appendix 

D 

THE  METHODS  OF 
THE  STUDY 

D 

D 

SINCE  SOCIOLOGICAL  FINDINGS  ARE  THE  JlESULT  OF  THE  JlESEARCH-
er's methods, I must describe my specific methods and their short-
comings in more detail  than was possible  in the Introduction,  in 
order to give a fair picture of the reliability,  validity, and limita-
tions of the data. 

THE MAIL QUESTIONNAIRE  SURVEY 

As  I  noted  in  the  Introduction,  I  had  to  resort  to  a  mail  ques-
tionnaire  in  order  to  obtain  data  from  the  Levittowners  before 
they moved to their new community. The mail questionnaire ran 
to  four  pages,  and  included a  covering letter  explaining why  it 
was  being sent out by the builder and why it was  to be returned 
to  the  University of Pennsylvania.  The letter said:  "We want to 
emphasize  this  is  a  University  research  project.  The Levitt firm 
sends  out our questionnaire in order to protect your anonymity, 
but  the  filled-out  questionnaire  comes  back  to  us  here."  It  was 
signed  by  the  Director  of  the  University's  Institute  for  Urban 
Studies,  since  I  did  not  want  to  be  identified  in  Levittown  as 
being connected with the survey. Although some people thought 
it  was  a  Levitt  promotion  or  inquiry,  most  accepted  it  at  face 
value. 

The questionnaire bore a code number based  on  the lot num-
ber of the house,  so  that reminders could  be sent  to people who 
•  435  • 

Appendix 
had  not returned  theirs.1  Although  this  created  some  suspicion 
that  I  knew  people's  names,  I  actually  did  not,  and  as  it 
turned  out,  the  reminders  were  quite  effective.  The  original 
questionnaire was  returned by 45  per cent of the buyers, and two 
reminders brought questionnaires  from  another  14  per cent and 
7  per cent  respectively,  thus giving a  total  return  rate  of 66  per 
cent.2  The  first  reminder was  sent by  the  Levitt firm  to  the  pre· 
vious  residence;  the  second  one  was  sent  by  the  Institute  for 
Urban Studies  to  the occupant at  his  Levittown  address,  usually 
about a month after people had moved in. 

Originally,  I  had  decided  to  ask  women  to  fill  out  the  ques-
tionnaires because  I  felt  they  had more time  to do so  than  their 
husbands, although they were asked  to check with their husbands 
on questions pertaining to  them.  Later, the choice of who would 
answer  was  left  up  to  the  respondent,  but  even  then,  women 
filled  it out more often than men.  In the final  sample of analyzed 
questionnaires, 6o per cent had been filled  out by women, 32  per 
cent  by  men,  and  8  P.er  cent  by  a  joint effort.  If women  had  a 
different  point  of  view  about  the  move  to  Levittown,  the  ques-
tionnaire data  undoubtedly  reflect a  female  bias,  but on  impor-
tant  questions,  I  asked  for  both  the  wife's  and  the  husband's 
point of view.  I  did not do any comparative analysis  to check for 
female  bias on other questions,  but most  questions  asked  for  in-
formation  rather  than  attitudes,  and  thus  are  not  especially 
affected  by  sex  differences.  Moreover,  because  of  the  inherent 
limitations  of  asking  people  questions  by  mail,  personal  ques-
tions  were  reduced  to  the  absolute  minimum.  Even  so,  only  11 
per cent of the  respondents  refused  to  give  their  income,  always 
the most difficult question for which to get answers. 

Since  I  could  not  afford  to  analyze  all  of  the  2100  returned 
questionnaires,  I  decided  to draw  a  sample.  From a  comparison 
of  some  demographic  data  collected  by  the  builder  on  all  pur-
chasers,  it was  apparent  that,  despite  the  high  return rate,  older 
people,  blue  collar  workers,  and  the  poorly  educated  were  not 
adequately represented among the respondents. 8  Consequently, I 
decided  to  draw  a  sample  based  on the  characteristics of the  en-
tire  population  rather  than  one  based  on  the  characteristics  of 
only the questionnaire respondents. 

Because  women  had  answered  the  questionnaire  more  often 
than  men,  and  because  I  felt  education  was  a  significant  deter-
minant  of  whether  the  questionnaire  would  be  answered,  I 

Appendix 

stratified the sample by women's education and by a variable that 
had some relation to age and income, the type of house bought in 
Levittown.  Interviewers  were  sent  to  a  15  per  cent  random 
sample of houses in the first  three neighborhoods, and data were 
obtained  on  women's  years  of  schooling.  This  provided  a  fre-
quency distribution  of  years  of schooling  by  house  type  in  each 
neighborhood.  On the oasis of this distribution,  I  then selected a 
sample  of  questionnaires. to  represent  30  per  cent  of  all  house-
holds  in  the  first  three neighborhoods, and obtained a  set of 952 
questionnaires  which  reflected  the  distribution  of  house  types 
and of women's years  of schooling  in each  of the neighborhoods. 
The final  sample still did not represent the population exactly. It 
could not correct directly for  age,  sex,  income, and men's  educa-
tion-or for  those  unknown  factors  that  make  one  Levittowner 
with  ten years  of schooling return his questionnaire and another 
not.  As  a  result,  the  findings  probably  still  underrepresent  the 
older and lower-income purchasers to some extent. 

mE INTERVIEW  STUDY 

As  I  indicated  in  the  Introduction,  I  thought  that  as  a  partici-
pant-observer I  could not conduct formal  interviews with people, 
because personal  questions are answered more easily if they come 
from  a  stranger  than  from  a  resident  of  the  community.  I  had 
enough funds  to interview a  10 per cent sample of the first  neigh-
borhood  (of  670  houses)  and  selected  a  random  one  stratified 
only  to  include  the  proper proportion  of  the  three  house  types. 
Half  the  respondents  were  to  be  men.  Of  the  65  households  in 
the  sample,  seven  could  not  be  found  at  home  after  five  call-
backs,  a  couple  refused,  and  in  some  instances,  wives  had  to  be 
interviewed because the men could not be reached. Of the remain-
ing 58  people, another  13  were  lost over  the two years before  the 
reinterview.  (Eight  had  moved,  one  was  never  home,  three  re-
fused,  and  one  had  become  senile.)  The  final  sample  thus  con-
sisted of 27 women and 18 men, each interviewed twice. The Phil-
adelphia sample  of  65  was  also  selected  from  the  first  neighbor-
hood,  to  make  sure  that  it would  include  only  people  who  had 
lived  in  Levittown  at  least  two years.  It was  originally  random, 
but a high refusal rate eventually resulted in a final  sample of 55· 
37 of them women, 18 men. 

In  both  samples,  the  refusals  came  primarily  from  men  and 

Appendix 

from  older,  poorer,  and  poorly  educated  purchasers.  Wherever 
possible, the data were analyzed by sex, age, occupation, and edu· 
cation  to  determine  how  these  affected  the  answers,  but  when  I 
report  figures  for  the  entire sample,  women,  and  younger,  more 
affiuent,  and  better·educated  people  are  somewhat  overrepre-
sented.4  Although  this  understates  the  extent  of  dissatisfaction 
and  worries  somewhat,  the  undersampling  of  men  (who  gen-
erally  reported  less  dissatisfaction)  overstates  it,  so  that  the  two 
may cancel  each  other out.  Moreover, since all  respondents came 
from  Levittown's  first  neighborhood,  and  later  purchasers  were 
of  higher socioeconomic level,  the  class  bias  in  the samples may 
thus  make  them  more  representative  of  Levittown  as  a  whole. 5 
Of course, the data are limited in that they apply only to  the first 
buyers  in  Levittown.  Although  later  buyers  might  react  differ-
ently on some questions,  I  doubt whether time  of arrival affected 
the amount and direction of  behavior change.  I  analyzed some of 
the data  to check for differences  between  those who had  lived  in 
Levittown  two years and those who had been there for three, and 
found none.  Moreover, an initial draft of the mail questionnaire, 
sent  to  the  first  300  purchasers  in  the  first  neighborhood,  had 
asked  whether  they  felt  themselves  to  be  pioneers,  but  so  few 
answered  this  question  positively  that  it  was  dropped  from  the 
final version. 

I  did  not  attempt  a  systematic  study  of why  so  many  former 
Philadelphians  refused  to  be  interviewed,  but many  of  the  men 
(who  did  most  of  the  refusing)  indicated  they  could  not  spare 
the  time  for  the  interview.  The  poor  transportation  between 
Levittown and Philadelphia made it difficult to  find  interviewers 
who could work evenings and weekends  to contact  the men,  and 
some had trouble in obtaining interviews. 

The more important questions  used  in  the interview  schedule 
have been included with the findings  in the text.  Most dealt with 
behavior and attitude change and typically asked people whether 
an  activity  had  increased  or  decreased  since  they  had  come  to 
Levittown.  Since the easiest response would have been to say "no 
change,"  I  left it out of the question,  requiring people  to volun-
teer it. Consequently, I  believe I  got a fair estimate of the change 
which  took  place,  or  rather,  of  the  change  people  thought  had 
taken  place.  The questions  were  carefully worded  to  make  sure 
that  no  answer  was  morally  or  psychologically  more  desirable 
than  any  other,  and  questions  about  negative  feelings,  such  as 

Appendix 

boredom,  were always  introduced with a  sentence  telling  people 
that boredom existed and  they were  not alone  in feeling  it.  Even 
so,  some  respondents  undoubtedly  emphasized  favorable  and 
underemphasized unfavorable change, although  they were  not at 
all  reluctant to criticize Levittown or to  talk about what worried 
them.  The  reinterview  schedule  repeated  the  questions  asked 
initially,  and  the  schedule  for  the  ex-Philadelphians  used  the 
same questions wherever relevant.  In some instances, respondents 
were  asked  to  report  on  behavior  and  attitude  change  for  their 
spouse  as  well,  in  the  hope  that  this  would  enlarge  the  sample. 
When I  analyzed  these  questions,  however,  I  found  that answers 
about  husbands  given  by wives  differed  considerably  from  those 
of  the  men  in  the  sample,  and  evidently  people  misperceived 
their spouses' feelings. 

The interview findings could not be tested for statistical signif-
icance  because  of the  size  and imperfect  randomness  of the  sam-
ples,  but the consistent patterns in many answers suggest that the 
findings  are  not a  result of chance and  that it is  possible  to carry 
out useful  quantitative analyses  with small  samples.  Even so,  the 
results should  be  considered  as  illustrative  evidence  rather  than 
scientific proof. 

THE PARTICIPANT-OBSERVATION STUDIES 

My  major  research  activities  as  a  participant-observer  included 
the following: 

1.  As  a  home  owner and a  resident,  I  lived  in  the community 
and  used  its  social  and  physical  facilities  like  everyone:  else.  I 
could  study  my  own  residence  in  the  community  and  observe 
that of other Levittowners. 

2.  As  a  resident of a specific  block,  I  could both act as  a  neigh-
bor and observe my own actions,  and also study my neighbors in 
their relationship to me and to other neighbors. 

3·  I  attended meetings of all  organizations about which I  knew 
and  at  which  I  could  be  present  without  being overly  visible.  I 
also  attended  almost  all  meetings  of  public  agencies  and  many 
of  the  meetings  of social,  civic,  political,  and  cultural  groups.  I 
could not attend meetings of women's clubs, and I  did not attend 
many  religious  functions  (except  in  the  Jewish  community), 
partly because of lack  of time,  partly because  people !:new  I  was 
Jewish  and  I  felt  I  would  be  intruding  in  a  Christian  religious 

Appendix 

service  to no  useful  purpose.  I  did,  however,  attend  at  least  one 
service  in almost every church.  I  also  attended other public gath-
erings, such as community ceremonies, social  functions  put on  by 
organizations,  high  school  football  games,  and  local  art  shows, 
and even dropped in on a couple of teenage dances. 

4·  I  conducted  two  types  of informal  interviews.  I  talked with 
people about specific events,  for  example,  to find  out the reasons 
for  things that  had happened  at meetings  I  had  observed.  I  also 
interviewed regularly a  large  number of informants in all  major 
institutions  and  groups  in  the  community.  Like  a  newspaper-
man,  I  "made the  rounds," checking regularly with one or more 
informants  in  the  governmental  agencies,  the  voluntary  associa-
tions,  churches,  and  political  parties.  I  also  maintained  continu-
ing  contact  with  ministers,  doctors,  lawyers,  and  realtors,  the 
local  newspapermen,  Levitt  executives,  store managers,  residents 
in  different  parts  of  the  community,  and some  of  the  pre-Levit-
town  residents  as  well.  Keeping  in  contact  with  informants  and 
keeping abreast of events took most of my research time. 

5·  I  visited  with  people socially as  a  resident,  and since  Levit-
town was always an important topic of conversation, I  was able to 
collect data on these occasions. 

These activities  cast  me  in  three  types  of research  roles:  total 
researcher,  researcher-participant,  and  total  participant. 8  As  a 
total  researcher  I  observed  events  in  which  I  participated  mini-
mally or not at all,  for  example,  as  a  silent audience  member at 
public meetings.  As  a  researcher-participant,  I  participated in an 
event but as a  researcher rather than as a resident, for example, at 
most  social  gatherings.  As  a  total  participant,  I  acted  spontane-
ously as  a  friend  or neighbor  and  subsequently analyzed  the  ac-
tivities in which  I  had so  participated. The total  participant role 
is  the most honest one, and insofar as  I  was  myself affected by the 
events in which  I  was  participating,  the  most  productive one  for 
understanding a  social  situation.  It is  difficult  to carry out,  how-
ever, because it is  almost impossible  to lose consciousness of one's 
research  role,  and  if  one  does  lose  it,  one  also  becomes  less  ob-
servant  of  what  is  happening.  Most  of  my  data  I  gathered  as  a 
total  researcher  or  researcher-participant,  and  only  when  I  was 
involved in activities which  I  did not expect  to  produce relevant 
data would I relax into the total participant role. 

Roles develop not only out of the participant-observer's activi-
ties,  but also out of how people view him. When the researcher is 

Appendix 

•  441  • 

very  different  from  the  people  he  studies,  he  is  permanently an 
outsider, as  I was  in the Italian working class neighborhood I  had 
studied in Boston. 7  In Levittown, however,  I  had bought a  house 
like  everyone  else,  was  about  the  same  age  as  most  of my  neigh-
bors, and was not different ethnically or in terms of income.  Like 
them,  I  was  a  resident,  home  owner,  neighbor,  citizen,  and 
friend-as well  as  a  researcher,  which  resulted  in  some role con-
flicts,  partly  for  myself,  but  also  for  the  people  I  was  studying. 
One of  these  was  on  my own  block,  and  as  I  noted  in  the  In· 
traduction,  I  decided  from  the  start  not  to  act  like  a  researcher 
there.  I  kept my formal  research activities on the block to a mini· 
mum and tried to be a  total  participant as  often as  I  could.  Even 
so,  occasionally  my  neighbors  were  ambivalent  about  my  role. 
Once,  a  neighbor  invited  my  wife  and  me  to  a  meeting  of  her 
church fellowship to show us what the church was  like, but asked 
me  to  take  no  notes.  Away  from  my  own  block,  I  always  an-
nounced myself as a  researcher as  soon as I could, so as  to prevent 
uncertainty about my role.  As  I  indicated earlier,  people were as 
interested in my topic of study as  I  was,  and revealing myself as  a 
researcher did  not affect  their willingness  to  be studied.  Indeed, 
if I  had asked questions without explaining why I  was so curious, 
people  might  have  been  more  suspicious,  especially  if  the  ques-
tions  would  have  been  impertinent  when  asked  by  a  nonre-
searcher.  Also,  they  might  have  found  out  later  that  I  was  a  re-
searcher  and  thus  been  angry  with  me  the  next  time.  Unless 
there are pressing reasons to the contrary, complete openness and 
honesty is always the best policy. 

If I  aroused suspicion,  it was  about getting to know  too  much 
of  the  less  ethical  or  respectable  aspects  of community life.  I  re-
ported  before  that  some  politicians wondered  if my  book would 
be  like  Peyton  Place,  and  another  resident  asked  me  if  I  had 
found  any  of  Whyte's  "organization  men"  in  the  community. 
People  also  became  upset  at  my  presence  if  they  were  not  on 
their  best  behavior.  When  I  attended  private  political  meetings, 
I  would always  explain why  I  was  there and that I  would not be 
taking  notes  or  mentioning names  in  the  book.  And  I  recall  at-
tending  a  picnic  once,  in  which  a  community leader  showed  up 
in  a  rather  outlandish  pair  of  walking  shorts.  One  of  the  pick-
nickers  suggested  to  a  newspaper columnist  that  she  put  this  in 
her column.  She  indicated  that she  would not,  since  she  was  not 
working on Sundays, but pointed to me and said, "You have  to be 

Appendix 

careful  of him,  he  writes  everything  in  the  annals  of history."  I 
could only sputter that I was not working on Sundays either. 

Because  I  knew  all  the  community's  leaders,  I  aroused  some 
status  anxiety  among  my  neighbors.  I  was  occasionally  kidded 
about  having  a  front  seat  at  important  community  events  and 
was  once  asked  jokingly  whether I  could do  someone  a  favor  at 
city  hall.  (I  made  it  clear  that  I  had  absolutely  no  influence  in 
the community-as, indeed, I  did not.) To reduce their anxiety, I 
refrained from  establishing social  relations with community lead-
ers.  I  did not invite  them  to my house,  but then  I  was  not much 
of  a  party-giver  anyway,  and  the  few  parties  which  I  held  were 
limited to people on the block. Although my neighbors thought I 
had higher status in the community than they,  I  always felt that I 
had  less  than  the  leaders  whom  I  interviewed,  because  even  if  I 
had a  more prestigious job, I  was  not a  real  member of the com· 
munity. 

Actually,  much  of  the  role  conflict  developed  because  people 
wanted  me  to  take  nonresearch  roles.  I  mentioned  earlier  that 
because  of  my  planning  background,  I  was  asked  to  become  ac· 
tive  in  the  community,  and  was  once  offered  a  position  on  the 
Planning Board.  I  considered  taking it,  but felt it would conflict 
with  my  research  role  and  would  be  unfair  to  the  community, 
since  I  was not a  "total" resident.  Community leaders sometimes 
asked  me  to  listen  to  their  troubles,  making  me  take  a  quasi-
therapeutic role,  and  one  thanked me  once for  being a  "wailing 
wall."  More often, they used  the interview to think through their 
own  problems and  to  test out ideas.  Aware  that this  might  affect 
their  subsequent  activities,  I  made  as  few  comments as  possible, 
and when asked for advice,  I  gave  it only when it involved a  tech-
nical  point  or  a  matter  of  no  great  importance.  I  usually  ex· 
plained  that  as  a  researcher  I  could  not  participate  in  the  com-
munity  in  any  way,  and  that  if  I  gave  advice  to  one  person  or 
group,  I  would  have  to  do  so  for  all  others.  Most  people  under-
stood my neutral stance and did not insist. 

Political  leaders  sometimes  tried  to  get  me  to  reveal  findings. 
They knew  I  was  talking  to  their  opponents  and  sought  to  find 
out  what  I  had  learned.  I  was  also  asked  and  sometimes  even 
pressured to  take sides on community issues,  and again I  refused. 
People knew that I  was  often well informed and that my opinion 
might  thus  be  based  on  information  they  did  not  have.  Some 
were  annoyed  by  my  constant  neutrality  (and  evasiveness)  and 

Appendix 

tried  to  tease  or shame me  into taking a  stand.  At  election  time, 
members  of  both  parties  were  curious  about  how  I  would  vote. 
Although  I  did  have  preferences,  I  revealed  them  only  once, 
shortly after my fieldwork  began. As  a political  independent who 
generally voted Democratic, I  found myself uncomfortable in the 
all-Republican  and  often  quite  conservative  circles  of  the  pre-
Levittown  residents.  When  I  learned  that  a  Democratic  party 
had been organized and ran into a couple of the organizers,  I  was 
so  pleased  that  I  said  I  welcomed  the  event  and  would  like  to 
help  out.  Afterwards,  I  realized  that  I  had revealed  my political 
sympathies,  and  if  these  became  known,  I  would  no  longer get 
data  from  the  Republicans.  I  went  back  to  the  two  organizers, 
withdrew  the offer,  and asked  them  to  keep  the  entire conversa-
tion secret.  They  understood my dilemma,  honored  my request, 
and as  far  as  I  can  tell,  no one knew where  I  stood  politically as 
long as  I  lived  in  Levittown. 

This  event  was,  of  course,  a  performance  break  in  which  I 
dropped  my  role  as  researcher  and  acted  as  a  person.  Although 
the  strains  of  being  a  performer  often  tempted  me  to  other 
breaches,  I  was able  to  resist.  The temptation was  strongest with 
people  whose  values  I  shared,  particularly  the  cosmopolitans. 
Consequently, I  had to repress the urge to share my findings or to 
talk  about  how  they  could  be  more  effective  politically,  but  to 
have given in to the urge would have been unfair to other Levit-
towners.  Instead,  I  relied  on  my  wife  and  academic  colleagues 
outside  Levittown  for  the  pressing need  to  talk freely  about  my 
study  and  to  act  as  a  person  rather  than  a  participant-observer. 
The various  roles  I  took  and  the  various roles  in which  I  was 
seen  undoubtedly affected  the  kinds  of data  I was given, but it is 
difficult for me to judge how. Since the  participant-ob~erver must 
"sell" himself to get his data, how he comes across as a person and 
a  role  player may  influence  what  people  tell  him.  I  pointed  out 
in the Introduction that I  became a  bland and neutral person so 
as not to alienate people with different opinions, but this persona 
also  reduced  my  own  activity  in a  relationship  and  gave  the  in-
formant  more  opportunity  to  talk.  Indeed,  quite  often  I  pur-
posely  "played  dumb"  in  interviews,  giving  the  impression  I 
knew  less  than  I  actually  did,  so  that  people  would  give  me  a 
fuller description of their activities and of their attitudes. Once I 
had ·obtained such  a  description,  I  could ask  more  specific  ques-
tions,  even  about  contradictions  in  the  informant's  description. 

Appendix 

This  posture  was  not  entirely  artificial;  I  often  did  feel  dumb, 
and was always surprised how little I  knew about the community 
and how poor I  was at predicting future events. As a  result,  I  had 
good  reason  for  being  humble  (and  neutral)  with  informants. 
This  is  only  one  way  of  relating  to  informants,  and  I  some-
times thought that if I  took a  more active role  in  the relationship 
and voiced  my own  opinions,  particularly deviant ones,  I  would 
learn  something  I  would  not  find  out  in  polite  conversation.  In 
the  end,  I  decided  that getting  into an  argument  might  alienate 
me from  people I  wanted to talk with in the future.  Moreover, as 
a  person,  I  was  more comfortable in an unassertive role,  and act-
ing  otherwise  would  only  have  increased  the  strain  of  being  a 
participant-observer.  Yet  perhaps  the  most  important  factor  in 
the  researcher-informant  relationship  is  status,  and  a  researcher 
of  higher  or  lower  status  than  his  informant  obtains  different 
data  than  a  researcher  who  is  felt  to  be of  equal  status.  As  I  in-
dicated,  I  always  sought  to  reduce  status  discrepancies  and  to 
treat  my data sources  as  equal--or as  superior,  because  they had 
information I did not have. 

The extent to which my own values affected my findings is also 
difficult  to judge.  Coming to Levittown with  the  hypothesis  that 
the  suburban  critics  were  wrong may  have  blinded  me  to  some 
contradictory data,  but it also made me feel  more sympathetic to 
the  Levittowners  and  more  receptive  to  how  they  thought  and 
felt.  So  did  my  belief  in  pluralism  and  relativism.  Yet  none  of 
these  values  caused  me  to  overidentify  with  my  sources  of data. 
Overidentification  is  a  major  problem  for  the  participant-ob-
server,  which  may create  such  strong attachments  to  the  popula-
tion  he  studies  that  he  fails  to see  undesirable  elements  in  their 
behavior. 8  The West  Enders  I  lived  with  in  my  previous  study 
were  poorer  than  I  and  were  facing  destruction  of  their  neigh-
borhood  by  an  urban  renewal  project  which  would  eventually 
replace  them  with  high-income  tenants.  They  were  underdogs, 
and I  identified with  them as  such. 9  The Levittowners were nei-
ther  poor  nor  threatened,  and  I  had  no  reason  to  feel  sorry  for 
them. 

I  probably identified most with some of the working class resi-
dents  who  had  financial  and  other  problems  or  were  struggling 
against  the  lower  middle  class  climate  of the  community,  partly 
because  they  resembled  West  Enders  I  had  liked,  partly because 
they were  underdogs,  and  partly  because  I  was  not always  happy 

Appendix 

with the political conservatism and moral  restrictiveness of some 
lower  middle  class  Levittowners.  I  did  not like  all  the  working 
class  people  I  met,  however,  for  some  were  openly  anti-intellec-
tual, opposed to  racial  integration,  narrowly patriotic and hawk-
ish about the "H" bomb, and politically no more liberal than  the 
lower middle  class.  And  I  was  also  uncomfortable  with some  of 
the  more  mobile  working class  people  who  were  trying  hard  to 
shed i:he  informality and skepticism that prevails in working class 
culture.  But I  was  more uncomfortable  with  lower  middle class 
people who  had graduated from  college  yet  had  retained  the  so· 
cial  and political conservatism of less  educated people.  Occasion-
ally,  I  had  to  remind  myself  that  I  was  judging  them  from  my 
own  class  position  as  a  university  professor  and  from  my  own 
preference  for  cosmopolitanism  and  was  lapsing  into  the  rejec-
tion of middle class culture that is  endemic to intellectuals. As  I 
got  to  know  people  better,  to  understand  their ways,  and  to  see 
how  these  related to  their own background, much of my discom-
fort  and disapproval  disappeared.  Since  most  Levittowners  were 
not status-seekers or anxious conformists,  it was easy to like them 
even  when  I  disagreed  with  their  ideas.  Indeed,  I  was  perhaps 
most critical of the cosmopolitans, because they felt  themselves to 
be liberals and intellectuals, but were not quite ready to practice 
what  they  preached  and  were  particularly  intolerant  of  their 
lower-status  neighbors.  Agreeing with  them about some  issues,  I 
was  ready  to  be  more  critical  of  them  when  I  disagreed.  I  as-
sumed  (perhaps  wrongly)  that  well-educated  people  should  and 
could be more pluralistic and less  intent on defending their own 
class  interests than others. 

The  values  (and  feelings)  which  most  affected  my  fieldwork 
concerned  the  deceptions  required  to  be  a  participant-observer. 
They generated  the  guilt and anxiety  I  described  in  the  Intro-
duction, and sometimes made me feel  I  was  using people for  my 
own  purposes.  Although  I  told  people  I  was  a  researcher at  the 
start,  I  realized  that  they  soon  forgot  this,  so  that  they  did  not 
really know how much they were being observed;  and among my 
immediate  neighbors,  I  was  collecting data  when  I  appeared  to 
act as  a resident. This problem is endemic to p~rticipant-observa­
tion, and I cannot find a way of eliminating it. If the researcher is 
completely  honest  with  people about his  activities,  they  will  try 
to  hide  actions  and  attitudes  they  consider  undesirable,  and  so 
will be dishonest. Consequently, the researcher must be dishonest 

Appendix 
to  get  honest  data.l 0  If this  leads  to  guilt  feelings,  it  can  affect 
findings,  for  it  may  discourage  him  from  being  critical  of  the 
people  he  has  deceived  and  used.  Fortunately,  these  feelings  de-
crease  once  fieldwork  is  over,  and  their  potential  effect  on  the 
findings can be dealt with during the analysis and writing period. 
They never disappear entirely, however, and one must either live 
with them or stop doing research. 

The researcher can  protect his informants by making sure that 
the data  he gathers  will  not  be  used  against  them.  He  need not 
mention  names,  and  in  any case,  his  publication  usually  appears 
years  after  the  research,  making  it  unlikely  that  the  data  can  be 
used against anyone.  Even if a  researcher decided that the behav-
ior of  those  he  studied was  so  unjust  that  he  felt  impelled  to  re-
veal  it,  he  would  still  withhold  names.  Such  problems  aside,  the 
researcher acts on  the faith  that the advantages of his research  to 
the  people  studied  will  outweigh  the  possible  disadvantages  of 
their  being  described  in  a  published  report,  or  the  more  subtle 
disadvantages of having been deceived by the researcher. 

Still,  the  main  shortcomings  (and  biases)  of  participant-obser-
vation result less  from  the researcher's roles and values than from 
the structure of the community he is  studying.  If the community 
is  suspicious  of outsiders,  he will  have difficulty  in gaining entry 
and  in  observing a  representative sample of the  population.  In a 
new  town,  conflict  between  the  builder  and  his  purchasers  may 
force  him to become identified with one,  thus losing rapport with 
the  other.l 1  Neither  problem  existed  in  Levittown.  Because  the 
community  was  new,  its  social  structure  open,  and  its  residents 
interested  in a  history of the community building process,  I  had 
no  trouble  in  gaining  cooperation  or  access  (except  at  caucuses 
and  some  private  political  meetings).  Community  boosters  are, 
of course,  the  most  helpful  (if  not always  the  most  accurate)  in-
formants,l2  but once I got to know them and had other sources of 
information about their groups,  they were usually willing to  talk 
about organizational conflict as  well.  But even  the less  enthusias-
tic  Levittowners  were  willing  to  help  me,  partly  because  they 
could  use  me  to  get  their  gripes  off  their  chest.,  My  contacts 
with  the  Levitt  organization  were  too  infrequent  and  the  pur-
chasers'  dissatisfaction  with  the  finn  too  rare  to  cause  any  prob-
lems,  although  in  this  instance as  in  many others,  being a  home-
owner with  the same  house-and-lawn  problems as  other residents 

Appendix 

•  447  • 

made it much easier for me to obtain rapport with the Levittown-
ers  than  for  an  outside  observer. 

Consequently,  I  did  not  have  to  worry  about  talking  with  a 
representative sample.  I  kept no record of how many people I  in-
terviewed  informally  during  the  three  years  of  fieldwork,  but  I 
maintained  frequent  contact  with  at  least  fifty  to  seventy-five, 
and  probably  talked  altogether  with  four  or  five  hundred-at 
least  one  member  from  about  15  percent  of  the  families  in  the 
first  three neighborhoods.  Moreover, since  I  was not doing a gen-
eral community study,  but was usually researching specific  topics, 
the  people  to  whom  I  talked  were  defined  by  the  topic  rather 
than  by my ability to  obtain access  and rapport.  Thus,  there was 
less opportunity for  the  bias  that develops  unintentionally when 
a researcher talks to more  people of his own class and educational 
level.  Even  so,  in my general  participant-observation activities,  I 
probably  talked  with  proportionately  more  middle  class  people 
than  working class  ones, and with  more  upper  middle class  ones 
than lower middle class ones.  Fortunately, however, I  had consid-
erable contact with working class  Levittowners who lived on my 
own block. 

Actually,  the  most  difficult  research  problem  was  untangling 
political  events.  I  could  not  always  get  honest  responses  from 
some  politicians;  even  when  I  did,  they saw  things so  much from 
their own perspective that I was, always faced with the problem of 
reconciling conflicting accounts.  The  difficulty  was  not so  much 
in finding out what  happened as why.  Political strategies are very 
complex even  in a  small community,  the  motivations  that create 
these  strategies  are  often  unfathomable,  and  politicians  are  not 
always  willing  (or  able)  to  reveal  their  motives  and  goals.  One 
solution is  to talk  to their opponents, ask  them to explain  an ac-
tion,  and  then confront  the original  actor with  this explanation. 
Usually  this  produces  denials,  but  sometimes  it  results  in  more 
detailed  explanations  than  would  otherwise  be  given,  and  these 
can then be checked out with others. Another solution is  to find a 
trustworthy  person  who  is  marginal  to  the  group  being  studied 
and  depend  on  him  for  final  verification.  Such  people  are  rare, 
however,  for  if one is  involved  in  politics it is  difficult to remain 
marginal.  I  was  fortunate  in  being able  to  find  a  couple  of mar-
ginal  people,  as  well  as  a  local  newspaperman  who  was  "in  the 
know"  but  sufficiently  detached  from  the  political  process  to 

Appendix 

serve  as  an  informant.  When  these  sources  were  not available,  I 
had  to  rely  on  the  information  given  me  by  people  whom  I 
trusted,  and  while  this  may  have  introduced some  bias  into  the 
data,  because  I  was  more likely  to  trust people I  liked and  those 
of my  own  educational  background,  I  had  no  other alternative. 
Sometimes,  what  really  happens  in  politics  is  virtually  unknow-
able to an outsider, and the only solution is  for  the researcher to 
become a participant and keep notes in the process. 

In one sense,  the mystery  of  politics  is  deceptive,  however,  for 
the  unknowable  is  restricted  to  motives  and  to  illegal  or  dis-
approved activities, neither of which is as important as one thinks 
they are while one is doing fieldwork.  Illegal and disapproved ac-
tivities usually play only a  minor role in the  politics of a  middle 
class  community.  The need  to  know about  them stems  from  the 
uncertainty of the  political  process,  which breeds  the desire  (and 
the curiosity)  to remain up to date and well  informed, and from 
the  rumors  about  corruption,  graft,  and  deals  that  come  up  all 
the time and have to be checked out., Curiosity about motivations 
comes from  the same uncertainty, but if the researcher is  patient, 
he  will  usually  find  that  later  actions  by  politicians  indicate 
which motives were at play in earlier ones. 

ANALyziNG  THE  DATA 

Although I had hoped to analyze the mail questionnaire data and 
the first  interview with  the random sample before getting deeply 
involved  in  the  participant-observation  and  before  drafting  the 
second  interview  schedule,  the rapid  pace  at  which  the  commu-
nity developed and the slow  pace at which data must be analyzed 
when funds  for research assistance are lacking made this impossi-
ble.  I  was able to do some  preliminary analysis of early question-
naire data with the help of students, and I  knew  how  the first  in-
terview was answered before I  made up the second schedule,  but 
most  of  the data  were  analyzed  after  the conclusion  of  the  field-
work. 

The mail questionnaire data were tabulated by IBM machines, 
but  the  interview  data  I  coded,  tabulated  and  analyzed  myself. 
Although  this  took  considerable  time,  it also  made  me  quite fa-
miliar  with  the  contents  of  each  interview,  and  with  the  inter-
viewees  as  people-at  least,  to  the  extent  that  they  described 
themselves  by  their  answers--making  it  methodologically  and 

Appendix 

•  449  • 

psychologically safer to attempt a  quantitative analysis of a  small 
sample. 

The participant-observation data were originally recorded in a 
diary,  but as  soon  as  I  had  translated  my  initial  study questions 
into a set of topics, I  gave  up the diary, and put my field  notes on 
5 X 8 sheets,  one  per  topic.  A  single meeting or  interview  often 
produced  data  on  half  a  dozen  topics,  and  recording  them  by 
topic  was  a  real  time-saver  in  the  analysis,  for  I  did  not  have  to 
take  apart  or  index  the  diary  to  synthesize  data  on  each  topic. 
Eventually, I  had many thousands of sheets, all filed  by topic, and 
I  drew my findings from an intensive and oft repeated rdding of 
them. I  made no real  attempt to integrate the findings reached by 
the  three  different  methods,  except when  I  had  developed  inter-
view questions  to  test an  idea learned in  participant-observation . 
.!\.fore  such  integration would have been desirable, but I  had such 
vast amounts of data that it took me a long time even  to organize 
them into a single narrative. 

The findings  presented here have all  the faults  of the methods 
by which  they were reached.  Often,  the  resulting generalizations 
are  examples  of  what  Merton  calls  "post  factum  sociological  in-
terpretation";  they  have  been  developed  after  the  observations 
were  made  and  are  not  tests  of  prior  hypotheses. 13  I  therefore 
conclude  with  the  same  remarks  with  which  I  ended my  earlier 
book: 

This, then,  is  not a scientific study, for it does not provide 
what  Merton  has  called  compelling evidence  for  a  series  of 
hypotheses.  It  is,  rather,  an  attempt  by  a  trained.  social 
scientist  to  describe  and  explain  the  behavior  of  a  large 
number of people,  using his methodological and theoretical 
training  to  sift  the  observations,  and  to  report  only  those 
generalizations which are justified by the data.  The validity 
of my findings  thus rests  ultimately on my judgments about 
the  data,  and  of  course  on  my  theoretical  and  personal 
biases in deciding what to study, what to see,  what to ignore 
and  how  to  analyze  the  products.  Properly  speaking,  the 
study is a  reconnaissance, an exploration of a community to 
provide  an  overview,  guided  by  the  canons  of  sociological 
theory and method,  but not attempting to offer documenta-
tion for all  the findings.  I do not mean to cast doubt on the 
conclusions  I  reached  (I  stand  behind  them  all)  or  on  the 
methods I  used.  Participant-observation  is  the only method 
I  know  that  enables  the  researcher  to get close  to  the  real-

•  450  • 

Appendix 

ities of social  life.  Its deficiencies  in  producing quantitative 
data  are  more  than  made  up  by  its  ability  to  minimize  the 
distance  between  the  researcher  and  his  subject  of  study. 14 

The  mail  questionnaires  and  interviews  provided  more  system-
atically  collected data,  and  are  thus  more  scientific  in one sense, 
although less  so  in another,  for  they can report only what people 
say they do and feel,  and not what a  researcher has seen them say, 
do, and feel. 

